last updated: 3 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
henderson & mumford [2022] fedcfamc2f 1344
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge betts
introduction
the stakes are high for the children and the parents, it is no easy decision.
the father’s circumstances
the mother’s circumstances
the hearing before me
mother:  case outline document, (b) initiating application filed 29 november 2018, (c) mother’s trial affidavit filed 1 november 2021, (d) affidavit of ms g (the father’s subsequent partner from before he was estranged) filed 1 november 2021.   initiating application filed 29 november 2018, (c) mother’s trial affidavit filed 1 november 2021, (d) affidavit of ms g (the father’s subsequent partner from before he was estranged) filed 1 november 2021.   mother’s trial affidavit filed 1 november 2021, (d) affidavit of ms g (the father’s subsequent partner from before he was estranged) filed 1 november 2021.   affidavit of ms g (the father’s subsequent partner from before he was estranged) filed 1 november 2021.
father:  case outline document, (b) father’s trial affidavit filed 2 november 2021, (c) affidavit of ms h (paternal grandmother) filed 25 may 2020, (d) affidavit of ms j (father’s solicitor) filed 30 november 2021, (e) father’s proof of evidence – which was marked as exhibit 5.   father’s trial affidavit filed 2 november 2021, (c) affidavit of ms h (paternal grandmother) filed 25 may 2020, (d) affidavit of ms j (father’s solicitor) filed 30 november 2021, (e) father’s proof of evidence – which was marked as exhibit 5.   affidavit of ms h (paternal grandmother) filed 25 may 2020, (d) affidavit of ms j (father’s solicitor) filed 30 november 2021, (e) father’s proof of evidence – which was marked as exhibit 5.   affidavit of ms j (father’s solicitor) filed 30 november 2021, (e) father’s proof of evidence – which was marked as exhibit 5.   father’s proof of evidence – which was marked as exhibit 5.
icl:   case outline document, (b) family report of senior family consultant ms k dated 3 june 2020 - which was marked as exhibit 2.   family report of senior family consultant ms k dated 3 june 2020 - which was marked as exhibit 2.
detailed chronology of events
pre-relationship: the father
pre-relationship: the mother
the early years of the parents’ relationship
y
2015 & 2016
leadup to separation
final separation
“this is bullshit, his behaviour is out of control, i am getting you and the kids out of here.”
he called the police and took the mother and children to a hotel in town c for the night.
mother relocates with the children, father does not cope
ivo is made to protect the mother from the father
leadup to these proceedings
mother commences proceedings
interim orders on 8 july 2019
second round of supervised visits
paternal grandfather assaults the father
interim hearing on 6 december 2019
the father and ms g separate & she obtains an ivo against him
hi [ms henderson] you don’t know me but i am one of [mr mumford’s] x friends as from only a couple of weeks ago just so you know [mr mumford] is on ice he is also on weed and he is also a woman basher he assaulted me as well as my daughter and i’m doing a statement [sic] to have him charged if u would like to subpoena me to court on ur behalf for the [sic]
“ya mum wants to start and accuse me of harrising [sic] u and start her shit game is on.”
second block of unsupervised time in april 2020
dear [ms h], i hope this email finds you well. i wanted to write to you to express my thanks for the clothes and items that you brought for the children they are very much appreciated. [x] and [y] have not stopped talking about their visit nannie. [ms henderson].
mother’s application to suspend time
father undertakes a hair strand test
family report
further interim hearing
father’s hair strand test is finally produced – and it is positive for illicit drugs
parenting proceedings: the law
primary considerations the primary considerations are:  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.  ) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b).
additional considerations  additional considerations are:   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views, (b) the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   the nature of the relationship of the child with: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to spend time with the child, and i) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis, (f) the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs,  the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (iii) the nature of the order, (iv) the circumstances in which the order was made, (v) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (vi) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (vii) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (iii) the nature of the order, (iv) the circumstances in which the order was made, (v) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (vi) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (vii) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (iii) the nature of the order, (iv) the circumstances in which the order was made, (v) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (vi) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (vii) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (iii) the nature of the order, (iv) the circumstances in which the order was made, (v) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (vi) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (vii) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (iii) the nature of the order, (iv) the circumstances in which the order was made, (v) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (vi) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (vii) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (iii) the nature of the order, (iv) the circumstances in which the order was made, (v) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (vi) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (vii) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (iii) the nature of the order, (iv) the circumstances in which the order was made, (v) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (vi) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (vii) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.  i) the nature of the order, (iv) the circumstances in which the order was made, (v) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (vi) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (vii) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.  ) the circumstances in which the order was made, (v) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (vi) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (vii) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (vi) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (vii) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (vii) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.  i) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child, (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
[83] it may be taken as well established by a line of authorities generally acknowledged to commence with russell & close (unreported full court, 25 june 1993) that the following are correct statements of principle: if a court is satisfied that a parent represents an unacceptable risk of harm to a child, then unless that risk is able to be sufficiently managed or ameliorated by, for instance, supervision of any time or communication between the parent and the child, the best interests of the child may require an order prohibiting that parent from spending time or communicating with the child, if the court does not find that a parent represents such an unacceptable risk of harm, nonetheless it may take into account anxiety on the part of the other parent arising from their genuine, but not necessarily rational, belief that the parent represents such a risk of harm. in such a case, the other parent's belief must be genuinely held. if it is entirely irrational and baseless, then the genuineness of the belief would clearly be open to doubt. however where such a belief is genuinely held, if the child spending time with a parent would sufficiently erode the other parent's capacity to properly care for the child, then that may of itself mean that the ensuing detriment to the child determines that it is in their best interests not to spend time or communicate with the parent, further, where the history of abuse, violence or like behaviour between two parents means that any continued interaction between them would similarly erode the resident parent's capacity to care for the child, the need for peace and tranquillity in their household may be a more compelling need for the child and hence also might justify an order prohibiting the other parent from spending time or communicating with a child: see sedgley & sedgley [1995] famca 154, (1995) flc 92-623. also of assistance is the decision of the full court in helbig & rowe [2016] famcafc 117 which explained, at [214], the correct approach in considering what the mother, in this case, has described as "the re andrew principle", as adumbrated in a v a [1998] famca 25, (1998) flc 92-800 where the full court said at 84,996, [3.29]: the first enquiry is whether there is objectively an unacceptable risk. if there is the court must take steps proportionate to the degree of risk. if there is not, the court may then need to consider whether the residence parent has a genuinely held belief that such a risk exists and whether that will have a significant impact on that party's capacity as the resident parent and so impinge on the best interests of the children. the court then needs to take steps proportionate to that circumstance.  phasis added) in undertaking the task of considering what steps are “proportionate to the degree of risk”, the decision of blinko makes it clear that the mere finding that a child may be at an unacceptable risk as a result of spending time in the care of another parent does not conclude the task before the primary judge. a necessary consequence of that finding, having regard to the totality of matters that the court is required to consider pursuant to s 60cc of the act, is for the court to contemplate whether steps can be taken to ameliorate or mitigate against that risk such that the child can maintain a meaningful relationship with the other parent.
findings as to best interests of the children & questions of unacceptable risk
additional considerations in s 60cc(3)
99. i have received support from my experiences by seeing a psychologist.
this is a reference to her sexual assault counsellor, whose subpoenaed notes i have earlier quoted from.
weighing up the competing proposals
conclusion & orders
associate: dated: 11 october 2022
dated: 11 october 2022
[1] ex 2, para 38.[2] see exs 19 & 20.[3] ex 24. [4] ex 25. [5] ex 25. [6] ex 2, para 66. [7] ex 22. [8] ex 10. [9] ex 10. [10] ex 2, para 24. [11] ex 2, para 112. [12] a decision of the high court of australia, reported in [1959] hca 8; (1959) 101 clr 298 [13] ex 2, paras 68 & 69. [14] ex 10. [15] ex 14. [16] ex 13. [17] ex 15. [18] the ivo is annexure “a” to mother’s trial affidavit.[19] ex 2, para 102.[20] ex 2, para 104.[21] ex 2, para 105. [22] ex 38, exhibit 39. [23] ex 12. [24] ex 17. [25] ex15; date of gp visit was 10 may 2019. [26] ex 2, para 106. [27] summary offences act 1966 (victoria), s 7[28] ex 18. [29] see particularly the father’s hair strand test result of 26 may 2020 discussed later in these reasons[30] see paras 1 – 13 of the paternal grandmother’s affidavit[31] ex 27. [32] ex 5. [33] ex 27. [34] ex 36. [35] ex 2, paras 22, 61 & 65. [36] ex 8. [37] ex 7. [38] ex 2, para 115. [39] ms g’s affidavit, paras 9 – 12.[40] ex 2, para 31