last updated: 23 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
maloney & sastri [2022] fedcfamc2f 1460
orders
upon noting
the court orders that:  any views expressed by the children and any matters (such as the children maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (b) the matters set out in ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 (cth), (c) the impact upon the children and upon their relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, (d) the impact upon the children and upon their relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, (e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   the matters set out in ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 (cth), (c) the impact upon the children and upon their relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, (d) the impact upon the children and upon their relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, (e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   the impact upon the children and upon their relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, (d) the impact upon the children and upon their relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, (e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   the impact upon the children and upon their relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, (e) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   status material produced by the south australia police and the department for child protection.   a children’s court, (b) a child protection authority, (c) a state or territory legal aid authority, and (d) a convener of any legal dispute resolution conference.   a child protection authority, (c) a state or territory legal aid authority, and (d) a convener of any legal dispute resolution conference.   a state or territory legal aid authority, and (d) a convener of any legal dispute resolution conference.   a convener of any legal dispute resolution conference.
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge brown
background
the child impact report provides preliminary expert advice about the needs and experience of children, to support decision making through dispute resolution processes and/or interim hearings. any views expressed, or professional recommendations made by the court child expert in a child impact report need to be considered within the limited nature and focus of this type of assessment.[2]
legal principles
conclusion
associate: dated: 7 november 2022
dated: 7 november 2022
[1] hereinafter referred to as “the act”.[2] child impact report of ms g dated 15 august 2022.[3] see report of the department for child protection dated 17 october 2022 at page 5.[4] marvel & marvel [2010] famcafc 101.