last updated: 10 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hibben & osava [2022] fedcfamc2f 1380
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge jenkins
introduction
background
the rule in rice & asplund
...some changed circumstances which would justify such a serious step, some new factor arising or, at any rate, some factor which was not disclosed at the previous hearing which would have been material...
the essential question however is as to the sufficiency of new events to provoke a new enquiry. the answer to this question involves putting events in the context of the broader circumstances pertaining to arrangements for a child and measuring the significance of the events against the significance of the steps that might follow in light of them.   the past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon which it was based, (b) whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing, (c) if there is such likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.   whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing, (c) if there is such likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.   if there is such likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.   firstly, the person seeking to re-agitate parenting orders must establish there is a prima facie case of changed circumstances, and (b) if so, the court must then determine whether the magnitude of the changed circumstances justifies embarking on a further hearing.   if so, the court must then determine whether the magnitude of the changed circumstances justifies embarking on a further hearing.
should the court determine the application to dismiss as a preliminary matter?
significant or material change in circumstances
analysis
conclusion
associate: dated: 27 october 2022
dated: 27 october 2022