last updated: 7 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
masterson & braxton [2022] fedcfamc2f 1635
orders
the court orders that:
the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge kearney
introduction
precis  x (‘x’) who is 10 years old, and (b) y (‘y’) who is eight (8) years old,   y (‘y’) who is eight (8) years old,  llectively referred to as ‘the children’).   whether the mother’s application to commence parenting proceedings should be dismissed in reliance on the principle espoused in the decision of rice & asplund [1978] famca 84 (‘rice & asplund’), and (b) whether any costs order should be made.   whether any costs order should be made.   not permit the re-opening of the parenting proceedings, (b) order that the mother make a contribution towards the costs of the independent children’s lawyer fixed in the sum of $1,650 and payable to legal aid new south wales by way of fortnightly instalments of $25 commencing in about three months’ time, and (c) dismiss all outstanding applications.   order that the mother make a contribution towards the costs of the independent children’s lawyer fixed in the sum of $1,650 and payable to legal aid new south wales by way of fortnightly instalments of $25 commencing in about three months’ time, and (c) dismiss all outstanding applications.   dismiss all outstanding applications.
the applicable law
principle 1 (3) the first principle is that the court is to consider the needs of the child concerned and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings may have on the child in determining the conduct of the proceedings. principle 4 (6) the fourth principle is that the proceedings are as far as possible to be conducted in a way that will promote cooperative and child-focused parenting by the parties.
in giving effect to the principles for conducting child-related proceedings, the court must: consider the needs of the child concerned and the impact that the conduct of the proceedings may have on the child in determining the conduct of the proceedings, actively direct, control and manage the conduct of the proceedings, conduct proceedings in a way that will promote cooperation and child-focused parenting by the parties, (and finally) cause the proceedings to be conducted without undue delay with as little formality and legal technicality as possible.
the principles which, in my view, should apply in such cases are that the court should have regard to any earlier order and to the reasons for and the material on which that order was based. it should not lightly entertain an application to reverse an earlier custody order. to do so would be to invite endless litigation ... change is an ever present factor in human affairs. therefore, the court would need to be satisfied by the applicant that ... there is some changed circumstance which will justify such a serious step, some new factor arising or, at any rate, some factor which was not disclosed at the previous hearing which would have been material.   emphasis)
........the change or fresh circumstance must be such that upon becoming advised of it and being satisfied of its existence, a court would be left in no doubt that it was necessary to relitigate the parenting issue in dispute between the parties. that is not to say that a court must be satisfied that the fresh or changed circumstance would result in a change to the orders. it merely indicates that the change or fresh circumstance must be such that if taken into account there is a real likelihood that a change may follow.
nevertheless, there are significant changes that occur and which do require a court to reconsider decisions previously made. whether in a particular case a court should be willing to embark upon another hearing concerning the child and parent, or whether to do so would itself be demonstrably contrary to the best interests of the child, is a decision to be made in each particular case. how is that decision to be made? the court must look at:   the past circumstances, including the reasons for the decision and the evidence upon which it was based. (2) whether there is a likelihood of orders being varied in a significant way, as a result of a new hearing. (3) if there is such a likelihood, the nature of the likely changes must be weighed against the potential detriment to the child or children caused by the litigation itself. thus, for example, small changes may not have sufficient benefit to compensate for the disruption caused by significant re-litigation.
.....though sometimes unstated, the underlying conclusion will or ought be that the interests of the child in not being the subject of further litigation is more powerfully in the child’s welfare than to allow the application to continue.
in a case where the principle in rice & asplund arises for consideration, there are two circumstances which are central to the decision. first, there will already exist a parenting order and, axiomatically, the terms of that order will reflect the best interests of the child or children at the time of its making. second, the fact that an order has been made reflects that disputation between parties to a parenting dispute, such dispute being inherently contrary to the best interests of the children whilst it exists, has been brought to an end by a curial order. those twin circumstances dictate the conclusion that it cannot logically be in the best interests of the child or children to embark upon further litigation enquiring as to the child or children’s best interests unless it is first demonstrated that a sufficient change in circumstances has occurred since the parenting order was made.
... the question of whether a sufficient change in circumstances has occurred ... it is accepted that the applicant’s evidence should be taken at its highest.
.......the primary judge’s task was a two-staged process. first, to make findings of fact as to what changes there had been in circumstances since the making of the 2015 orders and secondly, to assess whether or not the father had established that these changes are sufficient to provoke a new inquiry, or put in another way, whether the father has established a prima facie case of changed circumstances that would justify embarking on a second contested parenting hearing as being in the child’s best interests.
the evidence  affidavit of mr masterson, filed 6 december 2021[1], (b) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 6 december 2021, (c) exhibit ‘f1’- outline of case document of the father filed 25 may 2022, (d) exhibit ‘f2’, being a new south wales police case report which relates to the time period from 18 october 2019 to 15 january 2021 regarding allegations of sexual abuse perpetrated by the father on the child k, (e) exhibit ‘f3’, being a new south wales police cops event created on 15 march 2021, which related to an attendance by the mother with the children at the suburb o police station, which records the mother’s concerns about the children being neglected in their father’s care (malnourished) and the father having physically assaulted x – (a small laceration to his face).   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 6 december 2021, (c) exhibit ‘f1’- outline of case document of the father filed 25 may 2022, (d) exhibit ‘f2’, being a new south wales police case report which relates to the time period from 18 october 2019 to 15 january 2021 regarding allegations of sexual abuse perpetrated by the father on the child k, (e) exhibit ‘f3’, being a new south wales police cops event created on 15 march 2021, which related to an attendance by the mother with the children at the suburb o police station, which records the mother’s concerns about the children being neglected in their father’s care (malnourished) and the father having physically assaulted x – (a small laceration to his face).   exhibit ‘f1’- outline of case document of the father filed 25 may 2022, (d) exhibit ‘f2’, being a new south wales police case report which relates to the time period from 18 october 2019 to 15 january 2021 regarding allegations of sexual abuse perpetrated by the father on the child k, (e) exhibit ‘f3’, being a new south wales police cops event created on 15 march 2021, which related to an attendance by the mother with the children at the suburb o police station, which records the mother’s concerns about the children being neglected in their father’s care (malnourished) and the father having physically assaulted x – (a small laceration to his face).   exhibit ‘f2’, being a new south wales police case report which relates to the time period from 18 october 2019 to 15 january 2021 regarding allegations of sexual abuse perpetrated by the father on the child k, (e) exhibit ‘f3’, being a new south wales police cops event created on 15 march 2021, which related to an attendance by the mother with the children at the suburb o police station, which records the mother’s concerns about the children being neglected in their father’s care (malnourished) and the father having physically assaulted x – (a small laceration to his face).   exhibit ‘f3’, being a new south wales police cops event created on 15 march 2021, which related to an attendance by the mother with the children at the suburb o police station, which records the mother’s concerns about the children being neglected in their father’s care (malnourished) and the father having physically assaulted x – (a small laceration to his face).   her response to initiating application filed 16 december 2021, (b) exhibit ‘m2’, being the affidavit of ms braxton filed 10 january 2022[2], which, as filed, was not in proper form and so with the consent of the father and the icl, was orally attested to by the mother in court during the hearing of these proceedings on monday, 24 october 2022, (c) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 16 december 2021, (d) exhibit ‘m1’, being the undated outline of case document of the mother filed 19 july 2022, including the minute of order consisting of six paragraphs and received by the court on 13 june 2022, and (e) exhibit ‘m3’, being the affidavit of mr masterson filed 31 march 2022.   exhibit ‘m2’, being the affidavit of ms braxton filed 10 january 2022[2], which, as filed, was not in proper form and so with the consent of the father and the icl, was orally attested to by the mother in court during the hearing of these proceedings on monday, 24 october 2022, (c) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 16 december 2021, (d) exhibit ‘m1’, being the undated outline of case document of the mother filed 19 july 2022, including the minute of order consisting of six paragraphs and received by the court on 13 june 2022, and (e) exhibit ‘m3’, being the affidavit of mr masterson filed 31 march 2022.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk filed 16 december 2021, (d) exhibit ‘m1’, being the undated outline of case document of the mother filed 19 july 2022, including the minute of order consisting of six paragraphs and received by the court on 13 june 2022, and (e) exhibit ‘m3’, being the affidavit of mr masterson filed 31 march 2022.   exhibit ‘m1’, being the undated outline of case document of the mother filed 19 july 2022, including the minute of order consisting of six paragraphs and received by the court on 13 june 2022, and (e) exhibit ‘m3’, being the affidavit of mr masterson filed 31 march 2022.   exhibit ‘m3’, being the affidavit of mr masterson filed 31 march 2022.   exhibit ‘icl1’, being the outline of case document filed by the icl on 26 may 2022, (b) exhibit ‘icl2’, being the single expert psychology report of dr b dated 19 may 2018[3], (c) exhibit ‘icl3’, being the tender bundle prepared by the icl, and (d) exhibit ‘icl4’, being the judgment of cleary j delivered 19 june 2019.   exhibit ‘icl2’, being the single expert psychology report of dr b dated 19 may 2018[3], (c) exhibit ‘icl3’, being the tender bundle prepared by the icl, and (d) exhibit ‘icl4’, being the judgment of cleary j delivered 19 june 2019.   exhibit ‘icl3’, being the tender bundle prepared by the icl, and (d) exhibit ‘icl4’, being the judgment of cleary j delivered 19 june 2019.   exhibit ‘icl4’, being the judgment of cleary j delivered 19 june 2019.
the parties’ proposals
chronology and analysis  on 11 june 2020, she described the father as being “handsy”, but that wasn't the “bad stuff” that happened but in the absence of a disclosure, the investigation was closed and then, about a month later, (b) on 16 july 2020, k made a more detailed statement about events when she was about eight (8) years old, (mid-2013) when she, her mother and her siblings were at the father’s home. the statement discloses that k and the father were in a room alone together whilst the mother was in another area of the house. the allegations consist of the father inappropriately touching k’s torso and buttocks, and then making her touch his penis for a period of time, before he suddenly resumed playing a game on his computer. an investigation followed, but stalled again for reasons which appear to include k’s reluctance to speak further.   on 16 july 2020, k made a more detailed statement about events when she was about eight (8) years old, (mid-2013) when she, her mother and her siblings were at the father’s home. the statement discloses that k and the father were in a room alone together whilst the mother was in another area of the house. the allegations consist of the father inappropriately touching k’s torso and buttocks, and then making her touch his penis for a period of time, before he suddenly resumed playing a game on his computer. an investigation followed, but stalled again for reasons which appear to include k’s reluctance to speak further.
... other than when i asked where i was at the time of the assault, as i never left her alone. i was either cooking or seeing to the other kids outside.
... the same age as [y]. i suspect there has been sexual assaults from their father towards [x] and [y].   y not having a current dental plan, there being no documentation to provide, (b) the father having fortnightly consultations with ms t (‘ms t’) who is a counsellor at u centre, being the father’s nominated provider for the purpose of him gaining employment. ms t says that she commenced seeing the father on 25 january 2022 when he disclosed to having a longstanding history of psychological distress. the results of the father’s completed depression, anxiety and stress scale (‘dass’) showed him experiencing depression in the mild range, anxiety in the extremely severe range and stress in the severe range. as a result of his presentation, a request was made by ms t for a centrelink medical certificate to be produced with a view to re-assessing the father’s capacity for work and the level of service that he currently accesses via centrelink, (c) dr v completed a centrelink medical certificate on 21 february 2022 that records the father as having a diagnosis of gad (generalised anxiety disorder) and possibly, ptsd (post-traumatic stress disorder) with him having symptoms of being withdrawn, anxious and struggling to cope. the certificate also records that there is a planned mh (mental health) care plan.   the father having fortnightly consultations with ms t (‘ms t’) who is a counsellor at u centre, being the father’s nominated provider for the purpose of him gaining employment. ms t says that she commenced seeing the father on 25 january 2022 when he disclosed to having a longstanding history of psychological distress. the results of the father’s completed depression, anxiety and stress scale (‘dass’) showed him experiencing depression in the mild range, anxiety in the extremely severe range and stress in the severe range. as a result of his presentation, a request was made by ms t for a centrelink medical certificate to be produced with a view to re-assessing the father’s capacity for work and the level of service that he currently accesses via centrelink, (c) dr v completed a centrelink medical certificate on 21 february 2022 that records the father as having a diagnosis of gad (generalised anxiety disorder) and possibly, ptsd (post-traumatic stress disorder) with him having symptoms of being withdrawn, anxious and struggling to cope. the certificate also records that there is a planned mh (mental health) care plan.   dr v completed a centrelink medical certificate on 21 february 2022 that records the father as having a diagnosis of gad (generalised anxiety disorder) and possibly, ptsd (post-traumatic stress disorder) with him having symptoms of being withdrawn, anxious and struggling to cope. the certificate also records that there is a planned mh (mental health) care plan.   the father’s eldest child is overweight and x is underweight, (b) y has rotting teeth, (c) j, (another child of the father’s), picks her face which the mother asserts is psychologically linked to anxiety, (d) y having a broken arm due to multiple incidents caused by inappropriate supervision, (e) a strange dog arriving in the backyard where y was and the father was not, and (f) x requiring his eye to be glued after walking into a doorknob.   y has rotting teeth, (c) j, (another child of the father’s), picks her face which the mother asserts is psychologically linked to anxiety, (d) y having a broken arm due to multiple incidents caused by inappropriate supervision, (e) a strange dog arriving in the backyard where y was and the father was not, and (f) x requiring his eye to be glued after walking into a doorknob.   j, (another child of the father’s), picks her face which the mother asserts is psychologically linked to anxiety, (d) y having a broken arm due to multiple incidents caused by inappropriate supervision, (e) a strange dog arriving in the backyard where y was and the father was not, and (f) x requiring his eye to be glued after walking into a doorknob.   y having a broken arm due to multiple incidents caused by inappropriate supervision, (e) a strange dog arriving in the backyard where y was and the father was not, and (f) x requiring his eye to be glued after walking into a doorknob.   a strange dog arriving in the backyard where y was and the father was not, and (f) x requiring his eye to be glued after walking into a doorknob.   x requiring his eye to be glued after walking into a doorknob.
analysis – father’s application to dismiss  her ignorance of the sexual assault allegations against the father regarding k which only surfaced four months after the trial, (b) the father’s failure to comply with various orders including having had him psychiatrically assessed, the provision of reports about him and y arising from the february 2022 orders and keeping her informed about event and decisions regarding the children’s health more generally, (c) the deterioration in the father’s parenting capacity brought on by his deteriorating mental health is evidenced by the centrelink medical certificate and ms t’s report earlier this year, (d) the ongoing neglect of the children including attending to y’s teeth and x’s continuing ftt issues, and (e) the failure in permitting the children’s voices to be heard by the single expert.   the father’s failure to comply with various orders including having had him psychiatrically assessed, the provision of reports about him and y arising from the february 2022 orders and keeping her informed about event and decisions regarding the children’s health more generally, (c) the deterioration in the father’s parenting capacity brought on by his deteriorating mental health is evidenced by the centrelink medical certificate and ms t’s report earlier this year, (d) the ongoing neglect of the children including attending to y’s teeth and x’s continuing ftt issues, and (e) the failure in permitting the children’s voices to be heard by the single expert.   the deterioration in the father’s parenting capacity brought on by his deteriorating mental health is evidenced by the centrelink medical certificate and ms t’s report earlier this year, (d) the ongoing neglect of the children including attending to y’s teeth and x’s continuing ftt issues, and (e) the failure in permitting the children’s voices to be heard by the single expert.   the ongoing neglect of the children including attending to y’s teeth and x’s continuing ftt issues, and (e) the failure in permitting the children’s voices to be heard by the single expert.   the failure in permitting the children’s voices to be heard by the single expert.   firstly, it is frankly inconceivable that a mother who is so quick to criticise the father about all manner of perceived parenting deficits (such as allowing a strange dog into a backyard with y), would not immediately commence proceedings to suspend the final orders until the sexual abuse complaint was investigated unless she herself had doubts about the alleged risk posed by the father, (b) secondly, the mother’s motivation after the two-year delay between when the mother became aware of the complaint and when she did something about it in this court was not because she was worried about the children’s welfare, but because she was responding to a recovery order application brought by the father as a result of her actions in withholding them. (c) next, in september 2021, the mother attempted and clearly failed to obtain evidence of the children being harmed via her attendance at the q hospital and, even on her own account, x has not made any such disclosures, and (d) finally, based on k’s recent mental health history and variable interactions with the police culminating in them suspending the investigation over 18 months ago, there is extremely limited prospects that further disclosures would be made now (noting that in any event it is not the role of experts of this court to conduct the types of interviews that the police routinely do when these sorts of allegations come up).   secondly, the mother’s motivation after the two-year delay between when the mother became aware of the complaint and when she did something about it in this court was not because she was worried about the children’s welfare, but because she was responding to a recovery order application brought by the father as a result of her actions in withholding them. (c) next, in september 2021, the mother attempted and clearly failed to obtain evidence of the children being harmed via her attendance at the q hospital and, even on her own account, x has not made any such disclosures, and (d) finally, based on k’s recent mental health history and variable interactions with the police culminating in them suspending the investigation over 18 months ago, there is extremely limited prospects that further disclosures would be made now (noting that in any event it is not the role of experts of this court to conduct the types of interviews that the police routinely do when these sorts of allegations come up).   next, in september 2021, the mother attempted and clearly failed to obtain evidence of the children being harmed via her attendance at the q hospital and, even on her own account, x has not made any such disclosures, and (d) finally, based on k’s recent mental health history and variable interactions with the police culminating in them suspending the investigation over 18 months ago, there is extremely limited prospects that further disclosures would be made now (noting that in any event it is not the role of experts of this court to conduct the types of interviews that the police routinely do when these sorts of allegations come up).   finally, based on k’s recent mental health history and variable interactions with the police culminating in them suspending the investigation over 18 months ago, there is extremely limited prospects that further disclosures would be made now (noting that in any event it is not the role of experts of this court to conduct the types of interviews that the police routinely do when these sorts of allegations come up).   x is a vulnerable child who in the past chose to be electively mute although it seems that at least now he is conversing in both a home and school setting. in the written evidence there is a comment from the father to the effect that when his son is in a familiar setting and/or is engaging with someone he is familiar with then he will speak. the child expert opined in 2018 that x has been traumatised by the parental conflict and he experiences anxiety. frankly, there was nothing to suggest that anything has changed for him, with the most compelling example being his recent engagement at the q hospital instigated by the mother. when asked questions by the medical staff at the q hospital, the only formed words he expressed were, “am not”, (which was recorded as being almost incomprehensible), these two words being said in response to a comment that he was behaving like a two-year-old. otherwise, it appears his recorded responses to simple questions must have been to “yes” and “no” questions which may have required only a physical response such as a head movement. when asked to submit to a physical examination, he simply rolled away and made grunting noises. (b) during observations with the single expert, y appeared untouched by the dispute. whether that remains the case now is unknown, but she is now eight (8) and clearly her maturation since 2018 would indicate she would have more cognitive ability and understanding that her parents are in conflict, which would be heightened further if she was required to submit to further interviews and observations conducted by court child experts, as the mother expects the court to conduct in order to (at the very least) obtain her views. (c) in addition, i accept the icl’s concerns about the potential for the father’s mental health to be adversely impacted by re-litigation to such an extent that his parental capacity is impaired. the trial judge reflected on the single expert’s opinion about the consequences of changing the children’s living arrangements with the father. at ‘icl4’ paragraph [67], the trial judge said that to change patterns is to de-stabilise and observed that to do so would pose difficulties for x. given the father’s recent recorded difficulties, further litigation may well push him over the edge in his capacity to cope, which may have consequences of a significant calibre for the children in terms of future living arrangements. (d) finally, and despite the comments within the reasons for judgment about the mother engaging in innuendo, reputation destruction and a focus on discrediting the father in order to achieve her goal of the children living with her,[14] the mother continues to invite others, including this court, to draw bows that are far too long, with future litigation posing a real potential of the father’s role being undermined even further than perhaps it already has. for example, the mother’s evidence is that: the father poses a risk of sexual harm because k was a similar age then as y is now, without any evidence that y has made any disclosures and knowing that k has essentially refused to speak further about her allegations, secondly, the father’s past drug use and alleged manner of getting around psychological assessments means there are adverse consequences on his long-term mental health and his capacity to promote healthy relationships between the children and others besides himself based on self-described multiple studies without any evidence that this has occurred including any decline in her relationship with the children, and finally, without any specification, the mother says that the father’s biological children to another person should be returned to that person’s care because the father has mistreated and abused them.   during observations with the single expert, y appeared untouched by the dispute. whether that remains the case now is unknown, but she is now eight (8) and clearly her maturation since 2018 would indicate she would have more cognitive ability and understanding that her parents are in conflict, which would be heightened further if she was required to submit to further interviews and observations conducted by court child experts, as the mother expects the court to conduct in order to (at the very least) obtain her views. (c) in addition, i accept the icl’s concerns about the potential for the father’s mental health to be adversely impacted by re-litigation to such an extent that his parental capacity is impaired. the trial judge reflected on the single expert’s opinion about the consequences of changing the children’s living arrangements with the father. at ‘icl4’ paragraph [67], the trial judge said that to change patterns is to de-stabilise and observed that to do so would pose difficulties for x. given the father’s recent recorded difficulties, further litigation may well push him over the edge in his capacity to cope, which may have consequences of a significant calibre for the children in terms of future living arrangements. (d) finally, and despite the comments within the reasons for judgment about the mother engaging in innuendo, reputation destruction and a focus on discrediting the father in order to achieve her goal of the children living with her,[14] the mother continues to invite others, including this court, to draw bows that are far too long, with future litigation posing a real potential of the father’s role being undermined even further than perhaps it already has. for example, the mother’s evidence is that: the father poses a risk of sexual harm because k was a similar age then as y is now, without any evidence that y has made any disclosures and knowing that k has essentially refused to speak further about her allegations, secondly, the father’s past drug use and alleged manner of getting around psychological assessments means there are adverse consequences on his long-term mental health and his capacity to promote healthy relationships between the children and others besides himself based on self-described multiple studies without any evidence that this has occurred including any decline in her relationship with the children, and finally, without any specification, the mother says that the father’s biological children to another person should be returned to that person’s care because the father has mistreated and abused them.   in addition, i accept the icl’s concerns about the potential for the father’s mental health to be adversely impacted by re-litigation to such an extent that his parental capacity is impaired. the trial judge reflected on the single expert’s opinion about the consequences of changing the children’s living arrangements with the father. at ‘icl4’ paragraph [67], the trial judge said that to change patterns is to de-stabilise and observed that to do so would pose difficulties for x. given the father’s recent recorded difficulties, further litigation may well push him over the edge in his capacity to cope, which may have consequences of a significant calibre for the children in terms of future living arrangements. (d) finally, and despite the comments within the reasons for judgment about the mother engaging in innuendo, reputation destruction and a focus on discrediting the father in order to achieve her goal of the children living with her,[14] the mother continues to invite others, including this court, to draw bows that are far too long, with future litigation posing a real potential of the father’s role being undermined even further than perhaps it already has. for example, the mother’s evidence is that: the father poses a risk of sexual harm because k was a similar age then as y is now, without any evidence that y has made any disclosures and knowing that k has essentially refused to speak further about her allegations, secondly, the father’s past drug use and alleged manner of getting around psychological assessments means there are adverse consequences on his long-term mental health and his capacity to promote healthy relationships between the children and others besides himself based on self-described multiple studies without any evidence that this has occurred including any decline in her relationship with the children, and finally, without any specification, the mother says that the father’s biological children to another person should be returned to that person’s care because the father has mistreated and abused them.   finally, and despite the comments within the reasons for judgment about the mother engaging in innuendo, reputation destruction and a focus on discrediting the father in order to achieve her goal of the children living with her,[14] the mother continues to invite others, including this court, to draw bows that are far too long, with future litigation posing a real potential of the father’s role being undermined even further than perhaps it already has. for example, the mother’s evidence is that: the father poses a risk of sexual harm because k was a similar age then as y is now, without any evidence that y has made any disclosures and knowing that k has essentially refused to speak further about her allegations, secondly, the father’s past drug use and alleged manner of getting around psychological assessments means there are adverse consequences on his long-term mental health and his capacity to promote healthy relationships between the children and others besides himself based on self-described multiple studies without any evidence that this has occurred including any decline in her relationship with the children, and finally, without any specification, the mother says that the father’s biological children to another person should be returned to that person’s care because the father has mistreated and abused them.   illogical, (leaving the children in the home of a sexual predator for two years without coming to court to change the final orders), and/or (b) blatant reputational damage to the father’s role in the children’s lives, the significance of which was a factor in why the court decided not to change the status quo back in 2019 and allocated sole parental responsibility to him as a result, (in part) because of the high conflict co-parenting relationship.   blatant reputational damage to the father’s role in the children’s lives, the significance of which was a factor in why the court decided not to change the status quo back in 2019 and allocated sole parental responsibility to him as a result, (in part) because of the high conflict co-parenting relationship.
the dispute and applicable law - costs
the evidence, discussion & analysis – costs  each fortnight she receives up to $1700 in the hand consisting of about $800 in nett income, $500 in child support for the two children who live with her and $300 in centrelink benefits, (the latter amount which i will disregard for the purpose of this exercise). (b) each fortnight she pays $1500 in rent, leaving only a minimal amount left over for her daily costs of living. (c) she has $98 in savings.   each fortnight she pays $1500 in rent, leaving only a minimal amount left over for her daily costs of living. (c) she has $98 in savings.   she has $98 in savings.
associate: dated: 28 november 2022
dated: 28 november 2022
[1] for convenience, references to any content within the affidavit of mr masterson shall be prefaced by the letters ‘’, followed by the numbered paragraph with the annexures identified alphanumerically. [2] for convenience, references to any content within the affidavit of ms braxton shall be prefaced by ‘’, followed by the numbered paragraphs, with annexures identified alphanumerically.[3] for convenience, references to any content within exhibit icl2 shall be prefaced by ‘the single expert report’ followed by the numbered paragraph.[4] see exhibit ‘icl4’[5] see the single expert report at [119][6] see the single expert report at [132][7] see ‘icl4’ at [111][8] see the single expert report at 124[9] see exhibit ‘icl4’ at [66] & [67][10] -23[11] -24[12] see exhibit ‘icl3’[13] -26[14] see [89] & [90] of ‘icl4’