last updated: 29 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
bartlett & denny (no 3) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1471
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction and background
the father pay the mother’s costs of defending the father’s application in a proceeding filed 23 december 2021 on an ordinary basis up to 3 march 2022 and on an indemnity basis thereafter, with such costs to be agreed or assessed.   the mother: affidavit of the mother’s solicitor, mr penhall, filed 24 august 2022, (b) the father: affidavit of the father filed 10 october 2022.   the father: affidavit of the father filed 10 october 2022.
relevant legal principles
if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just.  ) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to:   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.  the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings
11 both parties are in full-time employment. the mother works as a team leader at centrelink. the mother’s after-tax weekly income is about $1,405. her 2021 taxation notice of assessment states she has a taxable income of $94,105. the mother states that she has an unpaid account of her solicitors, penhall & co, in the sum of almost $83,000. she states that she does not have the money to fund further parenting proceedings whilst stating that there are outstanding property proceedings between the parties. the father’s financial statement filed 18 february 2020 revealed weekly salary before tax as an audiologist of $2,770 and weekly rental before tax from the [p street] property in the sum of $365. the father states that he estimates the net value of the parties’ [q street] property as being about $970,000, and the net value of the parties’ [p street] property as being about $535,000. these properties are jointly owned by the parties. the father states that in october 2021 he took out a new personal loan with westpac in the sum of $35,000 to pay legal fees. he states he also obtained approval for a second loan in the sum of $40,000 with [company r] in november 2021 to also help fund his legal fees. he states that his total legal costs of about $123,000 have already been paid by him. the mother occupies the [q street] property with the children. the parties’ property proceedings are yet to be determined. their proposed property adjustment orders sought differ, the father seeks, inter alia, an order that the above property be transferred to the mother but with the mother to refinance the mortgage loan and pay $125,000, whereas the mother seeks, inter alia, an order that the above property be transferred to her with herself to refinance the mortgage loan. the mother is the primary carer of the children, spending 9 nights in every fortnight during school term times with them, compared to the father’s 5 nights in every fortnight.  whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer  her solicitor’s letter dated 15 december 2021 in which, inter alia, a counter offer was made to the father as follows: “that with respect to the defendant parenting proceedings, there be no order as to costs.” after that counter offer was made, the following paragraph appeared:
this offer will remain available for acceptance for a period of 14 days after which it is deemed to be withdrawn. if the applicant fails in his costs application we will rely on this letter in support of the wife’s application that the husband bear the costs of such application.   her solicitor’s letter dated 3 march 2022 in which, inter alia, the following was stated:
we are instructed to offer settlement of your client’s application in a proceeding filed 20 january 2022 on the following basis: 1. that the applicant withdraws his application. 2. that there be no order as to costs with the intention that each party pay their own costs of the application. this offer will remain available for acceptance until 3pm on 7 march 2022.
on 3 march 2022, our client made a calderbank offer (copy attached). at that time our client's costs incurred in relation to the application and negotiations prior to your filing same amounted to $6,721.00 incl. gst. it is submitted that this was a commercial compromise which was not accepted by your client. assuming the court's acceptance of the above position, indemnity costs would normally apply from and after a failure to accept the offer in accordance with colgate palmolive co v cussons pty ltd [1993] fca 536, [1993] 46 fcr 225 at 233–4. costs prior to the offer would normally “follow the event” and be allowed on an ordinary basis.
g) such other matters as the court considers relevant
associate: dated: 1 november 2022
dated: 1 november 2022