last updated: 6 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
lorenzi & lorenzi [2022] fedcfamc2f 1506
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment“amended pursuant to r 10.14(b) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 1) rules 2021 (cth) on 9 november 2022”
judge kearney
introduction  x born in 2016 (‘x’), and (b) y born in 2018 (‘y’), and   y born in 2018 (‘y’), and
whom shall be collectively described as ‘the children’.
precis
the parties’ proposals and applicable law - security for costs
62.4 ... a factor in deciding whether security should be required is that the order may well mean that the action cannot proceed. that prospect does not require refusal of the application but it is often a significant matter.   no special circumstances need to be established to found a security for costs order, (b) the decision to order security for costs is discretionary both as to the making of the order and as to quantum, (c) the purpose of such an order is to secure justice between the parties by ensuring that an unsuccessful party does not occasion injustice to the other. (d) in addition to the matters set out in s 117(2a), other matters that may be relevant include – (i) the means of an applicant to satisfy an order for costs if they are unsuccessful noting that poverty should be no bar to justice. as for the respondent, the question is whether they can pay for their own costs. in light of s 117(2a) both parties’ financial circumstances are considered and it is no bar to a security for costs order if the applicant seeking the benefit of the order has the means to pay their costs nonetheless, (ii) the prospects of success is relevant although a detailed assessment as to prospects will not be undertaken unless there is a demonstrable probability of success or failure, (iii) whether the claim for security for costs is bona fide, genuine and not trivial, is vexatious or a sham, (iv) whether a security for costs order would be oppressive or stifle the litigation, meaning that if it is made, the result may be that the substantive proceedings cannot proceed and whilst on it is own, this consideration does not mean the security for costs application should fail, it can often be a significant matter. (v) whether the litigation involves a matter of public importance which could militate against the making of security for costs order, (vi) whether there has been a delay to bringing the application which causes prejudice to the respondent, (vii) whether there are other relevant matters including difficulties in enforcing a prospective costs order and the quantum of costs to be incurred.   the decision to order security for costs is discretionary both as to the making of the order and as to quantum, (c) the purpose of such an order is to secure justice between the parties by ensuring that an unsuccessful party does not occasion injustice to the other. (d) in addition to the matters set out in s 117(2a), other matters that may be relevant include – (i) the means of an applicant to satisfy an order for costs if they are unsuccessful noting that poverty should be no bar to justice. as for the respondent, the question is whether they can pay for their own costs. in light of s 117(2a) both parties’ financial circumstances are considered and it is no bar to a security for costs order if the applicant seeking the benefit of the order has the means to pay their costs nonetheless, (ii) the prospects of success is relevant although a detailed assessment as to prospects will not be undertaken unless there is a demonstrable probability of success or failure, (iii) whether the claim for security for costs is bona fide, genuine and not trivial, is vexatious or a sham, (iv) whether a security for costs order would be oppressive or stifle the litigation, meaning that if it is made, the result may be that the substantive proceedings cannot proceed and whilst on it is own, this consideration does not mean the security for costs application should fail, it can often be a significant matter. (v) whether the litigation involves a matter of public importance which could militate against the making of security for costs order, (vi) whether there has been a delay to bringing the application which causes prejudice to the respondent, (vii) whether there are other relevant matters including difficulties in enforcing a prospective costs order and the quantum of costs to be incurred.   the purpose of such an order is to secure justice between the parties by ensuring that an unsuccessful party does not occasion injustice to the other. (d) in addition to the matters set out in s 117(2a), other matters that may be relevant include – (i) the means of an applicant to satisfy an order for costs if they are unsuccessful noting that poverty should be no bar to justice. as for the respondent, the question is whether they can pay for their own costs. in light of s 117(2a) both parties’ financial circumstances are considered and it is no bar to a security for costs order if the applicant seeking the benefit of the order has the means to pay their costs nonetheless, (ii) the prospects of success is relevant although a detailed assessment as to prospects will not be undertaken unless there is a demonstrable probability of success or failure, (iii) whether the claim for security for costs is bona fide, genuine and not trivial, is vexatious or a sham, (iv) whether a security for costs order would be oppressive or stifle the litigation, meaning that if it is made, the result may be that the substantive proceedings cannot proceed and whilst on it is own, this consideration does not mean the security for costs application should fail, it can often be a significant matter. (v) whether the litigation involves a matter of public importance which could militate against the making of security for costs order, (vi) whether there has been a delay to bringing the application which causes prejudice to the respondent, (vii) whether there are other relevant matters including difficulties in enforcing a prospective costs order and the quantum of costs to be incurred.   in addition to the matters set out in s 117(2a), other matters that may be relevant include – (i) the means of an applicant to satisfy an order for costs if they are unsuccessful noting that poverty should be no bar to justice. as for the respondent, the question is whether they can pay for their own costs. in light of s 117(2a) both parties’ financial circumstances are considered and it is no bar to a security for costs order if the applicant seeking the benefit of the order has the means to pay their costs nonetheless, (ii) the prospects of success is relevant although a detailed assessment as to prospects will not be undertaken unless there is a demonstrable probability of success or failure, (iii) whether the claim for security for costs is bona fide, genuine and not trivial, is vexatious or a sham, (iv) whether a security for costs order would be oppressive or stifle the litigation, meaning that if it is made, the result may be that the substantive proceedings cannot proceed and whilst on it is own, this consideration does not mean the security for costs application should fail, it can often be a significant matter. (v) whether the litigation involves a matter of public importance which could militate against the making of security for costs order, (vi) whether there has been a delay to bringing the application which causes prejudice to the respondent, (vii) whether there are other relevant matters including difficulties in enforcing a prospective costs order and the quantum of costs to be incurred.   the means of an applicant to satisfy an order for costs if they are unsuccessful noting that poverty should be no bar to justice. as for the respondent, the question is whether they can pay for their own costs. in light of s 117(2a) both parties’ financial circumstances are considered and it is no bar to a security for costs order if the applicant seeking the benefit of the order has the means to pay their costs nonetheless, (ii) the prospects of success is relevant although a detailed assessment as to prospects will not be undertaken unless there is a demonstrable probability of success or failure, (iii) whether the claim for security for costs is bona fide, genuine and not trivial, is vexatious or a sham, (iv) whether a security for costs order would be oppressive or stifle the litigation, meaning that if it is made, the result may be that the substantive proceedings cannot proceed and whilst on it is own, this consideration does not mean the security for costs application should fail, it can often be a significant matter. (v) whether the litigation involves a matter of public importance which could militate against the making of security for costs order, (vi) whether there has been a delay to bringing the application which causes prejudice to the respondent, (vii) whether there are other relevant matters including difficulties in enforcing a prospective costs order and the quantum of costs to be incurred.  ) the prospects of success is relevant although a detailed assessment as to prospects will not be undertaken unless there is a demonstrable probability of success or failure, (iii) whether the claim for security for costs is bona fide, genuine and not trivial, is vexatious or a sham, (iv) whether a security for costs order would be oppressive or stifle the litigation, meaning that if it is made, the result may be that the substantive proceedings cannot proceed and whilst on it is own, this consideration does not mean the security for costs application should fail, it can often be a significant matter. (v) whether the litigation involves a matter of public importance which could militate against the making of security for costs order, (vi) whether there has been a delay to bringing the application which causes prejudice to the respondent, (vii) whether there are other relevant matters including difficulties in enforcing a prospective costs order and the quantum of costs to be incurred.  i) whether the claim for security for costs is bona fide, genuine and not trivial, is vexatious or a sham, (iv) whether a security for costs order would be oppressive or stifle the litigation, meaning that if it is made, the result may be that the substantive proceedings cannot proceed and whilst on it is own, this consideration does not mean the security for costs application should fail, it can often be a significant matter. (v) whether the litigation involves a matter of public importance which could militate against the making of security for costs order, (vi) whether there has been a delay to bringing the application which causes prejudice to the respondent, (vii) whether there are other relevant matters including difficulties in enforcing a prospective costs order and the quantum of costs to be incurred.  ) whether a security for costs order would be oppressive or stifle the litigation, meaning that if it is made, the result may be that the substantive proceedings cannot proceed and whilst on it is own, this consideration does not mean the security for costs application should fail, it can often be a significant matter. (v) whether the litigation involves a matter of public importance which could militate against the making of security for costs order, (vi) whether there has been a delay to bringing the application which causes prejudice to the respondent, (vii) whether there are other relevant matters including difficulties in enforcing a prospective costs order and the quantum of costs to be incurred.   whether the litigation involves a matter of public importance which could militate against the making of security for costs order, (vi) whether there has been a delay to bringing the application which causes prejudice to the respondent, (vii) whether there are other relevant matters including difficulties in enforcing a prospective costs order and the quantum of costs to be incurred.  ) whether there has been a delay to bringing the application which causes prejudice to the respondent, (vii) whether there are other relevant matters including difficulties in enforcing a prospective costs order and the quantum of costs to be incurred.  i) whether there are other relevant matters including difficulties in enforcing a prospective costs order and the quantum of costs to be incurred.
section 190 overarching purpose of civil practice and procedure provisions   the overarching purpose of the civil practice and procedure provisions is to facilitate the just resolution of disputes: (a) according to law, and (b) as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible.   according to law, and (b) as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible.   as quickly, inexpensively and efficiently as possible.
note 1: see also paragraphs 5(a) and (b). note 2: the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) must give effect to principles in the family law act 1975 when exercising jurisdiction in relation to proceedings under that act.   without limiting subsection (1), the overarching purpose includes the following objectives:
the just determination of all proceedings before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2), (a) the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court, (b) the efficient disposal of the court’s overall caseload, (c) the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (d) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.   the efficient use of the judicial and administrative resources available for the purposes of the court, (b) the efficient disposal of the court’s overall caseload, (c) the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (d) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.   the efficient disposal of the court’s overall caseload, (c) the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (d) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.   the disposal of all proceedings in a timely manner, (d) the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.   the resolution of disputes at a cost that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the matters in dispute.
...
section 191 parties to act consistently with the overarching purpose   the parties to a civil proceeding before the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) must conduct the proceeding (including negotiations for settlement of the dispute to which the proceeding relates) in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose.
...   in exercising the discretion to award costs in a civil proceeding, the federal circuit and family court of australia (division 2) or a judge must take account of any failure to comply with the duty imposed by subsection (1).
the evidence  the application in a proceeding filed by the mother on 21 october 2022, (b) the affidavit of ms lorenzi filed 3 november 2022, (c) the financial statement of ms lorenzi filed 3 november 2022, (d) exhibit ‘m1’ – the outline of case document filed by the mother on 3 november 2022, (e) exhibit ‘m2’ – the tender bundle filed by the mother and consisting of 27 pages, (f) exhibit ‘m3’ – the amended response to initiating application filed by the father on 30 august 2022.   the affidavit of ms lorenzi filed 3 november 2022, (c) the financial statement of ms lorenzi filed 3 november 2022, (d) exhibit ‘m1’ – the outline of case document filed by the mother on 3 november 2022, (e) exhibit ‘m2’ – the tender bundle filed by the mother and consisting of 27 pages, (f) exhibit ‘m3’ – the amended response to initiating application filed by the father on 30 august 2022.   the financial statement of ms lorenzi filed 3 november 2022, (d) exhibit ‘m1’ – the outline of case document filed by the mother on 3 november 2022, (e) exhibit ‘m2’ – the tender bundle filed by the mother and consisting of 27 pages, (f) exhibit ‘m3’ – the amended response to initiating application filed by the father on 30 august 2022.   exhibit ‘m1’ – the outline of case document filed by the mother on 3 november 2022, (e) exhibit ‘m2’ – the tender bundle filed by the mother and consisting of 27 pages, (f) exhibit ‘m3’ – the amended response to initiating application filed by the father on 30 august 2022.   exhibit ‘m2’ – the tender bundle filed by the mother and consisting of 27 pages, (f) exhibit ‘m3’ – the amended response to initiating application filed by the father on 30 august 2022.   exhibit ‘m3’ – the amended response to initiating application filed by the father on 30 august 2022.   exhibit ‘a’ – the family reported prepared by mr b and dated 1 september 2021, (b) exhibit ‘b’ – the update family report prepared by mr b and dated 7 september 2022.   exhibit ‘b’ – the update family report prepared by mr b and dated 7 september 2022.   the response to an application in a proceeding filed 31 october 2022. (b) the affidavit of mr lorenzi filed 28 october 2022.   the affidavit of mr lorenzi filed 28 october 2022.
discussion & analysis – costs   the financial circumstances of the parties, (b) the father’s prospects of success in the substantive proceedings, (c) the father’s failure to conduct the proceedings in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose insofar as engaging in negotiations for settlement, (d) the prospect of the relief sought stifling the proceedings, (e) whether the mother has delayed the bringing of the application which causes prejudice to the father.   the father’s prospects of success in the substantive proceedings, (c) the father’s failure to conduct the proceedings in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose insofar as engaging in negotiations for settlement, (d) the prospect of the relief sought stifling the proceedings, (e) whether the mother has delayed the bringing of the application which causes prejudice to the father.   the father’s failure to conduct the proceedings in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose insofar as engaging in negotiations for settlement, (d) the prospect of the relief sought stifling the proceedings, (e) whether the mother has delayed the bringing of the application which causes prejudice to the father.   the prospect of the relief sought stifling the proceedings, (e) whether the mother has delayed the bringing of the application which causes prejudice to the father.   whether the mother has delayed the bringing of the application which causes prejudice to the father.
the financial circumstances of the parties
the father’s prospects of success in the substantive proceedings
the father’s failure to conduct the proceedings in a way that is consistent with the overarching purpose insofar as engaging in negotiations for settlement
the prospect of the relief sought stifling the proceedings
whether the mother has delayed the bringing of the application which causes prejudice to the father   following the making of the august 2020 orders, she says that she knew that the father had failed to comply with those orders from at least january 2021 onwards, (b) the family report recommendations were known to the parties in september 2022 and despite this, she says she knew that the father continued not to comply with at least some of the recommendations, (c) from 30 august 2022, the mother knew the father’s final relief which apparently did not accord with some of the recommendations of the family report, (d) from 20 september 2022 the mother knew the father wanted to go to trial and not mediation.   the family report recommendations were known to the parties in september 2022 and despite this, she says she knew that the father continued not to comply with at least some of the recommendations, (c) from 30 august 2022, the mother knew the father’s final relief which apparently did not accord with some of the recommendations of the family report, (d) from 20 september 2022 the mother knew the father wanted to go to trial and not mediation.   from 30 august 2022, the mother knew the father’s final relief which apparently did not accord with some of the recommendations of the family report, (d) from 20 september 2022 the mother knew the father wanted to go to trial and not mediation.   from 20 september 2022 the mother knew the father wanted to go to trial and not mediation.
conclusion  the mother’s delay in bringing the application will cause prejudice to the father because he has had less than a month to secure the resources she speculates he has, (b) there is no persuasive evidence upon which i could safely find that the father has access to the financial resources to make a payment for security for costs, (c) i am concerned that if i make the security for costs order, the proceedings will be stifled (with the potential that not all the evidence will be available for me to determine the children’s best interests) because the mother contends that any failure by the father to comply with the order would warrant the trial proceeding on an undefended basis, just over 24 hours after the security for costs order would have been made and despite the father having secured legal representation and filed his trial material.   there is no persuasive evidence upon which i could safely find that the father has access to the financial resources to make a payment for security for costs, (c) i am concerned that if i make the security for costs order, the proceedings will be stifled (with the potential that not all the evidence will be available for me to determine the children’s best interests) because the mother contends that any failure by the father to comply with the order would warrant the trial proceeding on an undefended basis, just over 24 hours after the security for costs order would have been made and despite the father having secured legal representation and filed his trial material.   i am concerned that if i make the security for costs order, the proceedings will be stifled (with the potential that not all the evidence will be available for me to determine the children’s best interests) because the mother contends that any failure by the father to comply with the order would warrant the trial proceeding on an undefended basis, just over 24 hours after the security for costs order would have been made and despite the father having secured legal representation and filed his trial material.
associate: dated: 8 november 2022
dated: 8 november 2022