last updated: 16 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
sinclair & sinclair [2022] fedcfamc2f 1376
orders
the court orders:  x live with the mother on region b, (b) x spend time with the father in adelaide during term 4, 2022, on each alternate weekend from saturday between 10.30 am and 11.00 am until sunday at 3.00 pm or monday at 3.00 pm if monday is a public holiday, (c) handover to occur at the c street bus terminal in adelaide with the mother to deliver x to and from the terminal.   x spend time with the father in adelaide during term 4, 2022, on each alternate weekend from saturday between 10.30 am and 11.00 am until sunday at 3.00 pm or monday at 3.00 pm if monday is a public holiday, (c) handover to occur at the c street bus terminal in adelaide with the mother to deliver x to and from the terminal.   handover to occur at the c street bus terminal in adelaide with the mother to deliver x to and from the terminal.
in the event the mother remains residing on region b:  x live with the father in adelaide, (b) x spend time and communicate with the mother: (i) each alternate weekend from after school friday until sunday afternoon or monday afternoon, if monday is a public holiday, with handover times as agreed (except for the father’s day weekend when her time shall be suspended), (ii) on the mother’s day weekend, if her time does not fall on that weekend, from after school friday until sunday afternoon, with handover times as agreed, (iii) in the term 1 and term 3 school holidays, by agreement and failing agreement from the first saturday until the second wednesday, with handover times as agreed, (iv) in the term 2 school holidays from the first saturday until the second saturday, with handover times as agreed. (c) handover to occur at the c street bus terminal in adelaide at the commencement of time and at the town d ferry terminal at the conclusion of the time unless otherwise agreed.   x spend time and communicate with the mother: (i) each alternate weekend from after school friday until sunday afternoon or monday afternoon, if monday is a public holiday, with handover times as agreed (except for the father’s day weekend when her time shall be suspended), (ii) on the mother’s day weekend, if her time does not fall on that weekend, from after school friday until sunday afternoon, with handover times as agreed, (iii) in the term 1 and term 3 school holidays, by agreement and failing agreement from the first saturday until the second wednesday, with handover times as agreed, (iv) in the term 2 school holidays from the first saturday until the second saturday, with handover times as agreed. (c) handover to occur at the c street bus terminal in adelaide at the commencement of time and at the town d ferry terminal at the conclusion of the time unless otherwise agreed.   each alternate weekend from after school friday until sunday afternoon or monday afternoon, if monday is a public holiday, with handover times as agreed (except for the father’s day weekend when her time shall be suspended), (ii) on the mother’s day weekend, if her time does not fall on that weekend, from after school friday until sunday afternoon, with handover times as agreed, (iii) in the term 1 and term 3 school holidays, by agreement and failing agreement from the first saturday until the second wednesday, with handover times as agreed, (iv) in the term 2 school holidays from the first saturday until the second saturday, with handover times as agreed. (c) handover to occur at the c street bus terminal in adelaide at the commencement of time and at the town d ferry terminal at the conclusion of the time unless otherwise agreed.  ) on the mother’s day weekend, if her time does not fall on that weekend, from after school friday until sunday afternoon, with handover times as agreed, (iii) in the term 1 and term 3 school holidays, by agreement and failing agreement from the first saturday until the second wednesday, with handover times as agreed, (iv) in the term 2 school holidays from the first saturday until the second saturday, with handover times as agreed. (c) handover to occur at the c street bus terminal in adelaide at the commencement of time and at the town d ferry terminal at the conclusion of the time unless otherwise agreed.  i) in the term 1 and term 3 school holidays, by agreement and failing agreement from the first saturday until the second wednesday, with handover times as agreed, (iv) in the term 2 school holidays from the first saturday until the second saturday, with handover times as agreed. (c) handover to occur at the c street bus terminal in adelaide at the commencement of time and at the town d ferry terminal at the conclusion of the time unless otherwise agreed.  ) in the term 2 school holidays from the first saturday until the second saturday, with handover times as agreed. (c) handover to occur at the c street bus terminal in adelaide at the commencement of time and at the town d ferry terminal at the conclusion of the time unless otherwise agreed.   handover to occur at the c street bus terminal in adelaide at the commencement of time and at the town d ferry terminal at the conclusion of the time unless otherwise agreed.
in the event the mother moves back to adelaide   x live with the parents during school terms and term holidays on a week about basis, with changeover at the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00 pm if x is not at school), (b) handover occur at school or otherwise at bus stop e, f street, suburb g or such other location as agreed.   handover occur at school or otherwise at bus stop e, f street, suburb g or such other location as agreed.   in the christmas school holidays: (i) with the father from the first saturday until 2.00 pm on 24 december, (ii) with the mother from 2.00 pm on 24 december until 2.00 pm christmas day, (iii) with the father from 2.00 pm christmas day until 1.00 pm on 14 january, (iv) with handovers as follows: on the first saturday at the c street bus terminal (or bus stop e, f street, suburb g if the mother is living in adelaide), on 24 and 25 december at the mother’s parent’s home in suburb h, on 14 january at the town d ferry terminal (or bus stop e, f street, suburb g if the mother is living in adelaide), as otherwise agreed. (b) by facetime on each of the parent’s birthdays for up to one hour with the birthday parent to instigate the call, (c) by facetime at any reasonable time if x so wishes, (d) otherwise as agreed between the parties.   with the father from the first saturday until 2.00 pm on 24 december, (ii) with the mother from 2.00 pm on 24 december until 2.00 pm christmas day, (iii) with the father from 2.00 pm christmas day until 1.00 pm on 14 january, (iv) with handovers as follows: on the first saturday at the c street bus terminal (or bus stop e, f street, suburb g if the mother is living in adelaide), on 24 and 25 december at the mother’s parent’s home in suburb h, on 14 january at the town d ferry terminal (or bus stop e, f street, suburb g if the mother is living in adelaide), as otherwise agreed.  ) with the mother from 2.00 pm on 24 december until 2.00 pm christmas day, (iii) with the father from 2.00 pm christmas day until 1.00 pm on 14 january, (iv) with handovers as follows: on the first saturday at the c street bus terminal (or bus stop e, f street, suburb g if the mother is living in adelaide), on 24 and 25 december at the mother’s parent’s home in suburb h, on 14 january at the town d ferry terminal (or bus stop e, f street, suburb g if the mother is living in adelaide), as otherwise agreed.  i) with the father from 2.00 pm christmas day until 1.00 pm on 14 january, (iv) with handovers as follows: on the first saturday at the c street bus terminal (or bus stop e, f street, suburb g if the mother is living in adelaide), on 24 and 25 december at the mother’s parent’s home in suburb h, on 14 january at the town d ferry terminal (or bus stop e, f street, suburb g if the mother is living in adelaide), as otherwise agreed.  ) with handovers as follows: on the first saturday at the c street bus terminal (or bus stop e, f street, suburb g if the mother is living in adelaide), on 24 and 25 december at the mother’s parent’s home in suburb h, on 14 january at the town d ferry terminal (or bus stop e, f street, suburb g if the mother is living in adelaide), as otherwise agreed.   by facetime on each of the parent’s birthdays for up to one hour with the birthday parent to instigate the call, (c) by facetime at any reasonable time if x so wishes, (d) otherwise as agreed between the parties.   by facetime at any reasonable time if x so wishes, (d) otherwise as agreed between the parties.   otherwise as agreed between the parties.   x attend j school at k street, suburb l, (b) the parties share all the costs associated with her schooling, including school fees, uniforms, text books, stationery and excursions, (c) the parties be restrained from enrolling x in any other school without the prior written consent of the other party, (d) the parties be restrained from moving x’s residence from the adelaide metropolitan area without the prior written consent of the other party.   the parties share all the costs associated with her schooling, including school fees, uniforms, text books, stationery and excursions, (c) the parties be restrained from enrolling x in any other school without the prior written consent of the other party, (d) the parties be restrained from moving x’s residence from the adelaide metropolitan area without the prior written consent of the other party.   the parties be restrained from enrolling x in any other school without the prior written consent of the other party, (d) the parties be restrained from moving x’s residence from the adelaide metropolitan area without the prior written consent of the other party.   the parties be restrained from moving x’s residence from the adelaide metropolitan area without the prior written consent of the other party.
reasons for judgment
judge jenkins
introduction
background
material relied upon   his amended initiating application filed 2 august 2022, (b) his trial affidavit filed 2 august 2022, and (c) the child impact report of ms u dated 11 may 2022.   his trial affidavit filed 2 august 2022, and (c) the child impact report of ms u dated 11 may 2022.   the child impact report of ms u dated 11 may 2022.   her amended response filed 22 august 2022, (b) her trial affidavit filed 23 august 2022, (c) her financial statement filed 22 august 22, (d) an affidavit of her sister ms v filed 23 august 22, (e) an affidavit of her partner, mr r filed 23 august 22, and (f) the child impact report of ms u dated 11 may 2022.   her trial affidavit filed 23 august 2022, (c) her financial statement filed 22 august 22, (d) an affidavit of her sister ms v filed 23 august 22, (e) an affidavit of her partner, mr r filed 23 august 22, and (f) the child impact report of ms u dated 11 may 2022.   her financial statement filed 22 august 22, (d) an affidavit of her sister ms v filed 23 august 22, (e) an affidavit of her partner, mr r filed 23 august 22, and (f) the child impact report of ms u dated 11 may 2022.   an affidavit of her sister ms v filed 23 august 22, (e) an affidavit of her partner, mr r filed 23 august 22, and (f) the child impact report of ms u dated 11 may 2022.   an affidavit of her partner, mr r filed 23 august 22, and (f) the child impact report of ms u dated 11 may 2022.   the child impact report of ms u dated 11 may 2022.
the evidence
the father
the mother
mr r
ms v
ms u – family consultant
the relevant legal principles
in some cases, the determination of “best interests” may well mean that one party’s choice is effectively outweighed in the balance. alternatively, proper balancing may result in the child’s “best interests” being served by orders which do not give one parent “optimal” arrangements or outcomes.   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.
parental responsibility
the considerations pursuant to section 60cc of the act
the primary considerations
even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.
that was subsequently endorsed by the full court in mccall.   regular and consistent face-to-face time as well as communication is maintained, and (b) the live-with parent is able to encourage and promote that relationship.   the live-with parent is able to encourage and promote that relationship.   time is limited to one overnight (or possibly two) on a weekend during school terms, (b) the mother will not actively encourage and promote his relationship with x, and (c) the mother may choose to move yet again.   the mother will not actively encourage and promote his relationship with x, and (c) the mother may choose to move yet again.   the mother may choose to move yet again.
the additional considerations
any views expressed by the children and any factors (such as their maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give those views
the nature of the children’s relationships with each of their parents and other significant persons in their lives
the extent to which the children’s parents have taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in long-term decision making in relation to the children, to spend time and to communicate with the children
the extent to which each of the children’s parents have fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain the children
the likely effect of a change in the children’s circumstances, including the likely effect of a separation from a parent or other significant persons in their lives
the practical difficulty and expense associated with the children spending time and communicating with a parent, and whether that difficulty substantially affects the children’s right to maintaining personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of the children’s parents and any other significant person to provide for their needs, including their emotional and intellectual needs
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the children and their parents, and any other characteristics of the children the court thinks relevant
if the children are aboriginal or torres strait islander children
attitude to the children, and to the responsibility of parenthood demonstrated by each of the children’s parents
any family violence involving the children or a member of their family, and if a family violence order applies or has applied, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
one of the objects of modern family law statutes (including fla 1975 and fca 1975) is to enable parties to a broken relationship to start a new life for themselves, to control their own future destinies and, where desired, to form new relationships, free from unnecessary interference from a former spouse or partner or from a court. courts recognise that unwarranted interference in the life of a custodial parent may itself occasion bitterness towards the former spouse or partner which may be transmitted to the child or otherwise impinge on the happiness of the custodial (or residence) parent in a way likely to affect the welfare or best interests of the child. this said, the touchstone for the ultimate decision must remain the welfare or best interests of the child and not, as such, the wishes and interests of the parents. (footnotes omitted)
courts, exercising such discretions, should not ignore the disproportionate burden typically cast upon women by their being effectively immobilised as the custodial/residence parent.
reasonable practicability   in determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the court must have regard to:   how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.
consideration of the competing proposals   the mother has a job at the local restaurant, (b) the mother has rental accommodation from which she operates hospitality classes and allied health lessons, (c) x is settled in the local school where she has attended for 16 months and has made friends, (d) x is involved in dance on the region b, (e) x has a puppy on the region b.   the mother has rental accommodation from which she operates hospitality classes and allied health lessons, (c) x is settled in the local school where she has attended for 16 months and has made friends, (d) x is involved in dance on the region b, (e) x has a puppy on the region b.   x is settled in the local school where she has attended for 16 months and has made friends, (d) x is involved in dance on the region b, (e) x has a puppy on the region b.   x is involved in dance on the region b, (e) x has a puppy on the region b.   x has a puppy on the region b.   x’s time with the father would be limited to one or at most two nights each alternate weekend and during holidays (unless he travels to the region b), (b) the father is unlikely to regularly visit x and therefore would not be involved in her school, extra-curricular and other day to day activities, (c) the father may choose to move back to queensland if he finds himself living in a city where he has no family or friends and can only spend limited time with x which would further reduce her time with him, (d) x would miss her dad, (e) x would continue to miss her friends in adelaide, (f) x would have limited time with extended maternal family as the mother’s sister only visits once per month, (g) x would have to continue to make the long trip to and from region b each fortnight, (h) the parties would have to continue to bear the costs of the travel each fortnight.   the father is unlikely to regularly visit x and therefore would not be involved in her school, extra-curricular and other day to day activities, (c) the father may choose to move back to queensland if he finds himself living in a city where he has no family or friends and can only spend limited time with x which would further reduce her time with him, (d) x would miss her dad, (e) x would continue to miss her friends in adelaide, (f) x would have limited time with extended maternal family as the mother’s sister only visits once per month, (g) x would have to continue to make the long trip to and from region b each fortnight, (h) the parties would have to continue to bear the costs of the travel each fortnight.   the father may choose to move back to queensland if he finds himself living in a city where he has no family or friends and can only spend limited time with x which would further reduce her time with him, (d) x would miss her dad, (e) x would continue to miss her friends in adelaide, (f) x would have limited time with extended maternal family as the mother’s sister only visits once per month, (g) x would have to continue to make the long trip to and from region b each fortnight, (h) the parties would have to continue to bear the costs of the travel each fortnight.   x would miss her dad, (e) x would continue to miss her friends in adelaide, (f) x would have limited time with extended maternal family as the mother’s sister only visits once per month, (g) x would have to continue to make the long trip to and from region b each fortnight, (h) the parties would have to continue to bear the costs of the travel each fortnight.   x would continue to miss her friends in adelaide, (f) x would have limited time with extended maternal family as the mother’s sister only visits once per month, (g) x would have to continue to make the long trip to and from region b each fortnight, (h) the parties would have to continue to bear the costs of the travel each fortnight.   x would have limited time with extended maternal family as the mother’s sister only visits once per month, (g) x would have to continue to make the long trip to and from region b each fortnight, (h) the parties would have to continue to bear the costs of the travel each fortnight.   x would have to continue to make the long trip to and from region b each fortnight, (h) the parties would have to continue to bear the costs of the travel each fortnight.   the parties would have to continue to bear the costs of the travel each fortnight.   x could spend substantial and significant time with the father, (b) the father would be involved in x’s day to day life and school, (c) if the mother also returns to adelaide, the parties could have shared care, (d) x would be able to spend regular and frequent time with her extended maternal family in adelaide, (e) x could return to her old school, (f) x could resume her old friendships.   the father would be involved in x’s day to day life and school, (c) if the mother also returns to adelaide, the parties could have shared care, (d) x would be able to spend regular and frequent time with her extended maternal family in adelaide, (e) x could return to her old school, (f) x could resume her old friendships.   if the mother also returns to adelaide, the parties could have shared care, (d) x would be able to spend regular and frequent time with her extended maternal family in adelaide, (e) x could return to her old school, (f) x could resume her old friendships.   x would be able to spend regular and frequent time with her extended maternal family in adelaide, (e) x could return to her old school, (f) x could resume her old friendships.   x could return to her old school, (f) x could resume her old friendships.   x could resume her old friendships.   if the mother does not return she would have only limited time with the mother, (b) if the mother does not return x would have to continue to make the long trip to and from the region b each fortnight, (c) if the mother does not return the cost of travel for x would remain, (d) if the mother does not return x would miss her puppy, (e) x would miss her new friends from region b, (f) x would miss her dance school and potentially have to start afresh.   if the mother does not return x would have to continue to make the long trip to and from the region b each fortnight, (c) if the mother does not return the cost of travel for x would remain, (d) if the mother does not return x would miss her puppy, (e) x would miss her new friends from region b, (f) x would miss her dance school and potentially have to start afresh.   if the mother does not return the cost of travel for x would remain, (d) if the mother does not return x would miss her puppy, (e) x would miss her new friends from region b, (f) x would miss her dance school and potentially have to start afresh.   if the mother does not return x would miss her puppy, (e) x would miss her new friends from region b, (f) x would miss her dance school and potentially have to start afresh.   x would miss her new friends from region b, (f) x would miss her dance school and potentially have to start afresh.   x would miss her dance school and potentially have to start afresh.
determination
associate: dated: 10 november 2022
dated: 10 november 2022