last updated: 30 november 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
coric & coric [2022] fedcfamc2f 1377
orders
the court orders that:
the court declares that:
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge street:
introduction
chronology
evidence
i note that since the accident my relationship with my wife has diminished. we no longer enjoy the social life we once did and our intimacy has been impacted. my wife has become depressed and anxious and i am not sure if she will be able to return to performing the tasks she did prior to the accident.
the law
48 divorce (1) an application under this act for a divorce order in relation to a marriage shall be based on the ground that the marriage has broken down irretrievably. (2) subject to subsection (3), in a proceeding instituted by such an application, the ground shall be held to have been established, and the divorce order shall be made, if, and only if, the court is satisfied that the parties separated and thereafter lived separately and apart for a continuous period of not less than 12 months immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application for the divorce order. (3) a divorce order shall not be made if the court is satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood of cohabitation being resumed.
49 meaning of separation   the parties to a marriage may be held to have separated notwithstanding that the cohabitation was brought to an end by the action or conduct of one only of the parties (2) the parties to a marriage may be held to have separated and to have lived separately and apart notwithstanding that they have continued to reside in the same residence or that either party has rendered some household services to the other.   the parties to a marriage may be held to have separated and to have lived separately and apart notwithstanding that they have continued to reside in the same residence or that either party has rendered some household services to the other.
50 effect of resumption of cohabitation   for the purposes of proceedings for a divorce order, where, after the parties to the marriage separated, they resumed cohabitation on one occasion but, within a period of 3 months after the resumption of cohabitation, they again separated and thereafter lived separately and apart up to the date of the filing of the application, the periods of living separately and apart before and after the period of cohabitation may be aggregated as if they were one continuous period, but the period of cohabitation shall not be deemed to be part of the period of living separately and apart. (2) for the purposes of subsection (1), a period of cohabitation shall be deemed to have continued during any interruption of the cohabitation that, in the opinion of the court, was not substantial.   for the purposes of subsection (1), a period of cohabitation shall be deemed to have continued during any interruption of the cohabitation that, in the opinion of the court, was not substantial.
``in my view `separation' means more than physical separation — it involves the destruction of the marital relationship (the consortium vitae). separation can only occur in the sense used by the act where one or both of the spouses form the intention to sever or not to resume the marital relationship and act on that intention, or alternatively act as if the marital relationship has been severed. what comprises the marital relationship for each couple will vary. marriage involves many elements some or all of which may be present in a particular marriage — elements such as dwelling under the same roof, sexual intercourse, mutual society and protection, recognition of the existence of the marriage by both spouses in public and private relationships. when it is asserted that a separation has taken place it may be necessary to examine and contrast the state of the marital relationship before and after the alleged separation. whether there has been a separation will be a question of fact to be determined in each case.'' we are in general agreement with this statement of the law and wish to add only two qualifications to it. however, as it is a general statement about sec. 48 and 49 it is desirable that we comment upon the several propositions contained in it. we agree that ``separation means more than physical separation'' because ``separation'' is the event which is used to prove the breakdown of the marriage. however, we do not accept the statement — ``it involves the destruction of the marital relationship''. just as mr. bryant submitted that ``repudiation'' had the ring of fault about it, so ``destruction'' has the same ring. in any case, what the act speaks of is the breakdown of the marriage, so it is appropriate to use the word ``breakdown'' instead of the word ``destruction''. in practical terms, this may make no difference, but it is in keeping with the wording of the act.
it is important to realise that sec. 48 contemplates a very serious alteration in the marriage, which the act calls a ``separation'', and the continuance of that state, for a period of twelve months.
we also agree with the statement in todd's case that ``what comprises the marital relationship for each couple will vary''. it is for this reason that it is difficult to formulate a satisfactory test in cases where the parties live under the one roof. as sec. 48 is concerned with the marriage of the parties, it is the content of their marital relationship which must be examined, not a definition of what a marital relationship ought to include. this, of course, does not mean that the various statements about the content of the marital relationship are useless. they do provide valuable checklists in each case, but they cannot be applied mechanically. if, during the marriage, the parties treat as of little importance something which may ordinarily be a significant part of the marital relationship, then that aspect of their life may be of little importance in determining whether they have separated. the constituent elements of the marital relationship were referred to in todd's case in these words: —
``marriage involves many elements some or all of which may be present in a particular marriage — elements such as dwelling under the same roof, sexual intercourse, mutual society and protection, recognition of the existence of the marriage by both spouses in public and private relationships.'' to this general statement we wish to add but one phrase, ``the nurture and support of the children of the marriage''. this is probably implicit in the various cases to which todd's case referred but in view of the provisions of sec. 43, 61 and 73 of the family law act, it is important that it be made explicit. in russell v. russell, (1976) flc 90-039 jacobs j. said at 75,174: — ``the recognition by society of rights and duties of husband and wife in respect of the children of their marriage and of the relationship of the children of that marriage to their parents springing from their status as children of the marriage lies not on the periphery but at the centre of the social institution of marriage.' if the parties to a marriage say that they have stayed together for the sake of the children then they are saying that they are endeavouring to fulfil the responsibilities that the law, by sec. 61 and 73, casts upon them both. the relative significance of this will vary from marriage to marriage, but it is always an important element of a marriage. it is also important to recognise that the significance of residing in the same residence will vary from case to case. if the residence has been a ``family home'' in which the parties have lived with their children for many years, to reside there is to continue an observable constant factor which has continued throughout the marriage. certainly sec. 49(2) does not require the court to disregard the fact that the parties are residing in the same residence, as was submitted by mr. bryant. it simply allows the court to make a finding in the terms of sec. 48(2) notwithstanding the fact that the parties are residing under the one roof. in that way it removes any possible uncertainty about the use of the phrase ``separately and apart'' in sec. 48(2). section 72 of the family law act establishes a mutual obligation upon spouses in respect of maintenance, and this aspect of ``mutual society and protection'' is the only one which finds statutory expression. because of this the failure to maintain or the withdrawal of maintenance, whether by the action of one party or by agreement, may be a significant indication that the parties have separated we adopt the view expressed in todd's case that: — ``when it is asserted that a separation has taken place it may be necessary to examine and contrast the state of the marital relationship before and after the alleged separation. whether there has been a separation will be a question of fact to be determined in each case. there is one other comment upon sec. 49(2) which should be made because it arises directly in this case. the words ``have continued to reside'' used in conjunction with the words ``may be held'' suggest that the residing in the same residence may continue up to the time the court makes its finding of irretrievable breakdown of the marriage. in other words sec. 49(2) does not require the parties to have moved into separate residences before the decree nisi is pronounced. of course, if it appears at the hearing that the parties may continue in the same residence indefinitely this may well raise possibilities of reconciliation which must be considered under sec. 48(3). the words underlined are particularly significant in cases where the parties to a marriage continue to live in the same residence, and yet assert that the marriage has irretrievably broken down. in such cases, without a full explanation of the circumstances, there is an inherent unlikelihood that the marriage has broken down, for the common residence suggests continuing cohabitation. such cases therefor require evidence that goes beyond inexact proofs, indefinite testimony and indirect inferences. the party or parties alleging separation must satisfy the court about this by explaining why the parties continued to live under the one roof, and by showing that there has been a change in their relationship, gradual or sudden, constituting a separation. for this reason many of the judges of the family court of australia have adopted the practice of requiring corroboration of the applicant's evidence in cases where the parties reside in the same residence. we do not wish to lay down an inflexible rule that evidence from a witness other than the parties to a marriage must be given, but an applicant should always be ready to call such evidence. whether the judge will require such evidence will depend on the circumstances of each case.
13. i am conscious that a number of authorities decide that a party's state of mind need not be communicated to the other spouse, and in particular i refer to santos v. santos (c.a.) [1972] ewca civ 9, (1972) fam. 247. this case however dealt specifically with the question of whether, if the parties be living apart, there is an element required additional to physical separation, and if so whether that element can depend on a unilateral decision or attitude of mind. the court of appeal in that case held that there had to be an element additional to physical separation, and that communication by word or conduct was not a necessary ingredient of the additional element. i am of the opinion however, that a different consideration applies when in fact both parties continue to reside in the same residence. where the latter situation exists, and one party intends to bring the marriage to an end, that party must carry out that intention overtly, unequivocally and specifically. if it were otherwise, this sole ground for dissolution, one year's separation evidencing irretrievable breakdown of marriage, could be grossly abused by one spouse who ``wants the cake and eat it too'', viz. enjoying certain aspects of marital cohabitation, rejecting others as it suits, and then divorcing the other spouse when expedient. that, as i read it, is not the legislature's intention at all 16. this case is very much close to the border, and perhaps if evidence had been given by the older children, i may have heard something further which may have tipped the scales the other way. the authorities say over and over again that where the parties are living together under the same roof, great caution must be exercised in determining whether the consortium vitae has in fact been destroyed. it usually involves considering attitudes of mind, and the difficulty of judicially determining that attitude in any particular case may be great — as it has been in this case. my own belief is that when both parties are residing together, the court should err on the side of caution on the question of the destruction of the consortium vitae, as otherwise, as i have already said, it could lead to abuse and to injustice.
43 principles to be applied by courts (1) the family court shall, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this act, and any other court exercising jurisdiction under this act shall, in the exercise of that jurisdiction, have regard to: (a) the need to preserve and protect the institution of marriage as the union of 2 people to the exclusion of all others voluntarily entered into for life, (b) the need to give the widest possible protection and assistance to the family as the natural and fundamental group unit of society, particularly while it is responsible for the care and education of dependent children, (c) the need to protect the rights of children and to promote their welfare, (ca) the need to ensure protection from family violence, and (d) the means available for assisting parties to a marriage to consider reconciliation or the improvement of their relationship to each other and to their children. (2) paragraph (1)(a) does not apply in relation to the exercise of jurisdiction conferred or invested by division 2.
applicant’s submissions
respondent”s submissions
21. the attitudes and intentions of the parties may be spoken or unspoken, where both parties withdraw from recognition of the marriage the surrounding circumstances would often make it easier to establish separation. where one party only has formed the relevant attitude and intention they should have been communicated to the other party directly or indirectly. where other aspects of the relationship continue a party should not be heard to claim separation on the basis of a secret intention unknown to the other party. there are many ways of communicating an intention or change of attitude.
mental element (that is an intention on the part of at least one of the parties to terminate the martial relationship)
findings and conclusion
associate: dated: 11 november 2022
dated: 11 november 2022