last updated: 20 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
semper & cross [2022] fedcfamc2f 1591
orders
upon noting that the proceedings were conducted by telephone and in person
the court orders by consent that:
upon noting that in the event that the parties are seeking an extension of legal aid funding to attend the conference, they forward a request for an extension of funding to the relevant assignments officer at the legal services commission of south australia within forty eight (48) hours of the date of this order.   a copy of the said order, and (b) the current contact details of the parties (including current postal and telephone details).   the current contact details of the parties (including current postal and telephone details).
and it is further ordered until further order:  with the father from 1:00pm on saturday 12 november 2022 to 1:00pm on monday 14 november 2022. (b) thereafter each weekend from 1:00pm friday to 1:00pm monday of each week. (c) with the mother at all other times unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties.   thereafter each weekend from 1:00pm friday to 1:00pm monday of each week. (c) with the mother at all other times unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties.   with the mother at all other times unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parties.   discussing these proceedings or the allegations raised in these proceedings in the presence or hearing of the said child or from allowing anyone else to do so, (b) denigrating the other party, the other party’s partner or the other party’s family in the presence or hearing of the said child or from allowing anyone else to do so, (c) abusing, threatening or harassing the other party or from allowing anyone else to do so on their behalf, (d) exposing the child to family violence, (e) exposing the child to illicit substance abuse, (f) consuming illicit substances whilst the said child is in their respective care, (g) changing the said child’s principal place of residence from the metropolitan area of adelaide pending trial, (h) enrolling the child in any child care or educational facility such as kindergarten or school without the other party’s prior written consent having first been obtained.   denigrating the other party, the other party’s partner or the other party’s family in the presence or hearing of the said child or from allowing anyone else to do so, (c) abusing, threatening or harassing the other party or from allowing anyone else to do so on their behalf, (d) exposing the child to family violence, (e) exposing the child to illicit substance abuse, (f) consuming illicit substances whilst the said child is in their respective care, (g) changing the said child’s principal place of residence from the metropolitan area of adelaide pending trial, (h) enrolling the child in any child care or educational facility such as kindergarten or school without the other party’s prior written consent having first been obtained.   abusing, threatening or harassing the other party or from allowing anyone else to do so on their behalf, (d) exposing the child to family violence, (e) exposing the child to illicit substance abuse, (f) consuming illicit substances whilst the said child is in their respective care, (g) changing the said child’s principal place of residence from the metropolitan area of adelaide pending trial, (h) enrolling the child in any child care or educational facility such as kindergarten or school without the other party’s prior written consent having first been obtained.   exposing the child to family violence, (e) exposing the child to illicit substance abuse, (f) consuming illicit substances whilst the said child is in their respective care, (g) changing the said child’s principal place of residence from the metropolitan area of adelaide pending trial, (h) enrolling the child in any child care or educational facility such as kindergarten or school without the other party’s prior written consent having first been obtained.   exposing the child to illicit substance abuse, (f) consuming illicit substances whilst the said child is in their respective care, (g) changing the said child’s principal place of residence from the metropolitan area of adelaide pending trial, (h) enrolling the child in any child care or educational facility such as kindergarten or school without the other party’s prior written consent having first been obtained.   consuming illicit substances whilst the said child is in their respective care, (g) changing the said child’s principal place of residence from the metropolitan area of adelaide pending trial, (h) enrolling the child in any child care or educational facility such as kindergarten or school without the other party’s prior written consent having first been obtained.   changing the said child’s principal place of residence from the metropolitan area of adelaide pending trial, (h) enrolling the child in any child care or educational facility such as kindergarten or school without the other party’s prior written consent having first been obtained.   enrolling the child in any child care or educational facility such as kindergarten or school without the other party’s prior written consent having first been obtained.
reasons for judgment(ex tempore reasons settled from transcript)
judge dickson:
introduction
background  with the father from friday to monday of each week, and (2) with the mother for the balance of each week.   with the mother for the balance of each week.
for a few months, the mother has been saying she was going to move to [city b] to obtain the support of her mother.
documents relied upon in the hearing  initiating application filed 22 september 2022, (2) affidavit in support filed 22 september 2022, (3) affidavit filed 17 october 2022, (4) outline of case document filed 19 october 2022, (5) affidavit filed 4 november 2022, (6) affidavit of ms murray, solicitor, filed 9 november 2022, (7) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk, and (8) parenting questionnaire.   affidavit in support filed 22 september 2022, (3) affidavit filed 17 october 2022, (4) outline of case document filed 19 october 2022, (5) affidavit filed 4 november 2022, (6) affidavit of ms murray, solicitor, filed 9 november 2022, (7) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk, and (8) parenting questionnaire.   affidavit filed 17 october 2022, (4) outline of case document filed 19 october 2022, (5) affidavit filed 4 november 2022, (6) affidavit of ms murray, solicitor, filed 9 november 2022, (7) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk, and (8) parenting questionnaire.   outline of case document filed 19 october 2022, (5) affidavit filed 4 november 2022, (6) affidavit of ms murray, solicitor, filed 9 november 2022, (7) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk, and (8) parenting questionnaire.   affidavit filed 4 november 2022, (6) affidavit of ms murray, solicitor, filed 9 november 2022, (7) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk, and (8) parenting questionnaire.   affidavit of ms murray, solicitor, filed 9 november 2022, (7) notice of child abuse, family violence or risk, and (8) parenting questionnaire.   notice of child abuse, family violence or risk, and (8) parenting questionnaire.   parenting questionnaire.   response to final orders filed 17 october 2022, (10) affidavit in support filed 17 october 2022, (11) parenting questionnaire filed 17 october 2022, (12) summary of argument filed 18 october 2022, (13) notice of child abuse, family or risk filed on 17 october 2022, and (14) affidavit of ms worth, solicitor, filed 7 november 2022.  ) affidavit in support filed 17 october 2022, (11) parenting questionnaire filed 17 october 2022, (12) summary of argument filed 18 october 2022, (13) notice of child abuse, family or risk filed on 17 october 2022, and (14) affidavit of ms worth, solicitor, filed 7 november 2022.  ) parenting questionnaire filed 17 october 2022, (12) summary of argument filed 18 october 2022, (13) notice of child abuse, family or risk filed on 17 october 2022, and (14) affidavit of ms worth, solicitor, filed 7 november 2022.  ) summary of argument filed 18 october 2022, (13) notice of child abuse, family or risk filed on 17 october 2022, and (14) affidavit of ms worth, solicitor, filed 7 november 2022.  ) notice of child abuse, family or risk filed on 17 october 2022, and (14) affidavit of ms worth, solicitor, filed 7 november 2022.  ) affidavit of ms worth, solicitor, filed 7 november 2022.
sapol and dcp material
material from the department for child protection
material from the south australian police  a domestic abuse no offence recording dated 13 september 2022 in relation to an incident which occurred at handover, (2) a domestic abuse offence dated 23 december 2021 relating to the incident which occurred at the parties’ joint residence, resulting in a subsequent separation between the parties. the entry confirms that the father instructed the police on this occasion that he did not wish to press any charges or police action in relation to his allegation that he had been assaulted by the mother in the presence of the child, (3) the third entry is dated 6 august 2020 and relates to a domestic abuse call centre entry whereby the mother telephoned the police in relation to alleged ongoing domestic abuse said to be perpetrated by the father. the mother alleged that the father was abusive due to his ongoing drug use and erratic behaviour. on this occasion, advice was provided and the outcome is recorded as finalised, and (4) the final entry is dated 2 august 2020 and is entitled street check. this relates to a call made by the mother in relation to a handover with the father on that occasion. both parties were interviewed and the entry records the following:   a domestic abuse offence dated 23 december 2021 relating to the incident which occurred at the parties’ joint residence, resulting in a subsequent separation between the parties. the entry confirms that the father instructed the police on this occasion that he did not wish to press any charges or police action in relation to his allegation that he had been assaulted by the mother in the presence of the child, (3) the third entry is dated 6 august 2020 and relates to a domestic abuse call centre entry whereby the mother telephoned the police in relation to alleged ongoing domestic abuse said to be perpetrated by the father. the mother alleged that the father was abusive due to his ongoing drug use and erratic behaviour. on this occasion, advice was provided and the outcome is recorded as finalised, and (4) the final entry is dated 2 august 2020 and is entitled street check. this relates to a call made by the mother in relation to a handover with the father on that occasion. both parties were interviewed and the entry records the following:   the third entry is dated 6 august 2020 and relates to a domestic abuse call centre entry whereby the mother telephoned the police in relation to alleged ongoing domestic abuse said to be perpetrated by the father. the mother alleged that the father was abusive due to his ongoing drug use and erratic behaviour. on this occasion, advice was provided and the outcome is recorded as finalised, and (4) the final entry is dated 2 august 2020 and is entitled street check. this relates to a call made by the mother in relation to a handover with the father on that occasion. both parties were interviewed and the entry records the following:   the final entry is dated 2 august 2020 and is entitled street check. this relates to a call made by the mother in relation to a handover with the father on that occasion. both parties were interviewed and the entry records the following:
both parties were aware that the relationship was over and appeared to be capable of communicating civilly via phone. both parties stated that there had never been any physical altercations between them and their issues had been purely verbal.
orders sought by the parties
by the father  that if the child was ordered to return back to reside in the adelaide metropolitan area and if the mother followed, the father proposed: (a) that the status quo ante be reinstated, namely that the child live with him from 1 pm friday to 1 pm monday of each weekend and with the mother at all other times, (b) the father proposed that the handovers occur at his residence at suburb d, (c) the father proposed that for christmas day 2022, the child spend time with the mother from christmas eve to after lunch on christmas day and with the father from after lunch christmas day to until boxing day. (2) in the alternative, and in the event that the child was returned to reside in the metropolitan area and the mother remained living in city b, the father proposed: (a) that the child live with him, (b) that the mother spend time with the child each alternate weekend from thursday to monday, and (c) that handovers occur at the bp roadhouse, town f. (3) further, or in the alternative, in the event that the child was permitted to remain living with the mother in city b pending trial, the father sought the following: (a) that the child live with him five nights per fortnight from wednesday to monday of each alternate week, (b) that handovers occur at his residence at suburb d, (c) that the child spend time with the mother on christmas eve and christmas day and commence time spending with his father on boxing day.   that the status quo ante be reinstated, namely that the child live with him from 1 pm friday to 1 pm monday of each weekend and with the mother at all other times, (b) the father proposed that the handovers occur at his residence at suburb d, (c) the father proposed that for christmas day 2022, the child spend time with the mother from christmas eve to after lunch on christmas day and with the father from after lunch christmas day to until boxing day.   the father proposed that the handovers occur at his residence at suburb d, (c) the father proposed that for christmas day 2022, the child spend time with the mother from christmas eve to after lunch on christmas day and with the father from after lunch christmas day to until boxing day.   the father proposed that for christmas day 2022, the child spend time with the mother from christmas eve to after lunch on christmas day and with the father from after lunch christmas day to until boxing day.   in the alternative, and in the event that the child was returned to reside in the metropolitan area and the mother remained living in city b, the father proposed: (a) that the child live with him, (b) that the mother spend time with the child each alternate weekend from thursday to monday, and (c) that handovers occur at the bp roadhouse, town f. (3) further, or in the alternative, in the event that the child was permitted to remain living with the mother in city b pending trial, the father sought the following: (a) that the child live with him five nights per fortnight from wednesday to monday of each alternate week, (b) that handovers occur at his residence at suburb d, (c) that the child spend time with the mother on christmas eve and christmas day and commence time spending with his father on boxing day.   that the child live with him, (b) that the mother spend time with the child each alternate weekend from thursday to monday, and (c) that handovers occur at the bp roadhouse, town f.   that the mother spend time with the child each alternate weekend from thursday to monday, and (c) that handovers occur at the bp roadhouse, town f.   that handovers occur at the bp roadhouse, town f.   further, or in the alternative, in the event that the child was permitted to remain living with the mother in city b pending trial, the father sought the following: (a) that the child live with him five nights per fortnight from wednesday to monday of each alternate week, (b) that handovers occur at his residence at suburb d, (c) that the child spend time with the mother on christmas eve and christmas day and commence time spending with his father on boxing day.   that the child live with him five nights per fortnight from wednesday to monday of each alternate week, (b) that handovers occur at his residence at suburb d, (c) that the child spend time with the mother on christmas eve and christmas day and commence time spending with his father on boxing day.   that handovers occur at his residence at suburb d, (c) that the child spend time with the mother on christmas eve and christmas day and commence time spending with his father on boxing day.   that the child spend time with the mother on christmas eve and christmas day and commence time spending with his father on boxing day.
by the mother  that the child live with her, (2) that the child spend time with the father each alternate week from 1 pm thursday to 1 pm monday, (3) that the child spend time with the father on christmas day from 3 pm until 3 pm on new year’s day, (4) that handovers occur at the town g roadhouse, (5) the mother sought a series of mutual injunctions as set out in paragraph 4.5 of her minute, which i do not propose to read for the purposes of these reasons.   that the child spend time with the father each alternate week from 1 pm thursday to 1 pm monday, (3) that the child spend time with the father on christmas day from 3 pm until 3 pm on new year’s day, (4) that handovers occur at the town g roadhouse, (5) the mother sought a series of mutual injunctions as set out in paragraph 4.5 of her minute, which i do not propose to read for the purposes of these reasons.   that the child spend time with the father on christmas day from 3 pm until 3 pm on new year’s day, (4) that handovers occur at the town g roadhouse, (5) the mother sought a series of mutual injunctions as set out in paragraph 4.5 of her minute, which i do not propose to read for the purposes of these reasons.   that handovers occur at the town g roadhouse, (5) the mother sought a series of mutual injunctions as set out in paragraph 4.5 of her minute, which i do not propose to read for the purposes of these reasons.   the mother sought a series of mutual injunctions as set out in paragraph 4.5 of her minute, which i do not propose to read for the purposes of these reasons.   that if the child is ordered back to reside in adelaide, then he spend time with the father in each alternate week from 1 pm thursday to 1 pm monday, and (2) that handovers occur at the mcdonalds restaurant, suburb c.   that handovers occur at the mcdonalds restaurant, suburb c.
legal principles
parental responsibility
shared care arrangements  the need to ensure that the child has a meaningful relationship with both of his parents, and (2) the need to ensure that the child is protected from harm - both physical and psychological harm – which may arise if the child concerned is exposed to any kind of abuse, neglect and family violence.   the need to ensure that the child is protected from harm - both physical and psychological harm – which may arise if the child concerned is exposed to any kind of abuse, neglect and family violence.
conclusion
associate: dated: 11 november 2022
dated: 11 november 2022
[1] goode v goode (2006) flc 93-286 [82].[2] see affidavit of the mother filed at 17 october 2022 at paragraph 42.[3] ibid at paragraph 47.[4] [1998] famca 66.[5] [1997] famca 33; (1997) flc 92-755.[6] [2007] famca 1230.[7] ibid.[8] [1998] famca 66.[9] (1999) flc 92-852.[10] (2006) flc 93-286.