last updated: 22 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
astley & astley [2022] fedcfamc2f 1704
orders
the court orders by consent until further order that:
and the court orders that:  a list of the application/response and all affidavits to be relied upon including the dates of filing, (b) a brief chronology of relevant events, (c) a precise minute of the orders the party is seeking, and (d) a list of authorities to be relied upon, if any.   a brief chronology of relevant events, (c) a precise minute of the orders the party is seeking, and (d) a list of authorities to be relied upon, if any.   a precise minute of the orders the party is seeking, and (d) a list of authorities to be relied upon, if any.   a list of authorities to be relied upon, if any.
and the court orders by consent until further order that:
parenting
parental responsibility
care arrangements  in week 1 (commencing 14 november 2022): (i) from 3:00pm on monday to the commencement of kindergarten/day care on wednesday, (b) in week 2 (commence 21 november 2022): (i) from 3:00pm on monday to the commencement of kindergarten/day care on wednesday, (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   from 3:00pm on monday to the commencement of kindergarten/day care on wednesday,   in week 2 (commence 21 november 2022): (i) from 3:00pm on monday to the commencement of kindergarten/day care on wednesday, (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.
wife’s special occasion time  in 2022 during the christmas period as follows: (i) from the conclusion of school on the last day of term 4 until christmas day at 1:00pm. (b) for the wife’s birthday and the children’s birthdays: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day, from the end of school until 8:00pm. (ii) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm. (c) from 6:00pm on mother’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following mother’s day, (d) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   from the conclusion of school on the last day of term 4 until christmas day at 1:00pm.   for the wife’s birthday and the children’s birthdays: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day, from the end of school until 8:00pm. (ii) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm. (c) from 6:00pm on mother’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following mother’s day, (d) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   if the birthday falls on a school day, from the end of school until 8:00pm. (ii) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm.  ) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm.   from 6:00pm on mother’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following mother’s day, (d) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.
husband’s special occasion time  in 2022 during the christmas period as follows: (i) from christmas day at 1:00pm until new years day at 5:00pm. (b) for the husband’s birthday and the children’s birthdays: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day, from the end of school until 8:00pm. (ii) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm. (c) from 6:00pm on father’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following father’s day, (d) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   from christmas day at 1:00pm until new years day at 5:00pm.   for the husband’s birthday and the children’s birthdays: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day, from the end of school until 8:00pm. (ii) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm. (c) from 6:00pm on father’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following father’s day, (d) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   from 6:00pm on father’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following father’s day, (d) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.
holiday time   with the husband for one week of the school holidays, with such time to commence at 3:30pm on the first sunday of the holidays and conclude at 3:30 pm on the middle sunday of the holidays, (b) with the wife for one week of the school holidays, with such time to commence at 3:30pm on the middle sunday of the holidays and conclude on monday at the commencement of the following school term, and (c) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   with the wife for one week of the school holidays, with such time to commence at 3:30pm on the middle sunday of the holidays and conclude on monday at the commencement of the following school term, and (c) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.
communication
changeover
information   copies of the children’s school reports, (b) school newsletters. (c) order forms for the children’s school photos. (d) notices of school functions such as parent teacher interviews, concerts, fetes and sports days.   school newsletters. (c) order forms for the children’s school photos. (d) notices of school functions such as parent teacher interviews, concerts, fetes and sports days.   order forms for the children’s school photos. (d) notices of school functions such as parent teacher interviews, concerts, fetes and sports days.   notices of school functions such as parent teacher interviews, concerts, fetes and sports days.
restraints  from consuming, using or otherwise being under the influence of any illegal drug or substance within 24 hours of spending time or communicating with the child, or from allowing the child to be exposed to any person affected by illegal drugs, (b) being adversely affected by alcohol whilst spending time or communicating with the child, or from allowing the child to be exposed to any person adversely affected by alcohol, (c) physically chastising the children (or either of them) or allowing any other person to do so, (d) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other party, (e) speaking negatively about the other party within the hearing or presence of the children (or either of them), (f) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children (or either of them) and from permitting any other person to do so, and (g) from otherwise exposing the children (or either of them) to family violence.   being adversely affected by alcohol whilst spending time or communicating with the child, or from allowing the child to be exposed to any person adversely affected by alcohol, (c) physically chastising the children (or either of them) or allowing any other person to do so, (d) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other party, (e) speaking negatively about the other party within the hearing or presence of the children (or either of them), (f) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children (or either of them) and from permitting any other person to do so, and (g) from otherwise exposing the children (or either of them) to family violence.   physically chastising the children (or either of them) or allowing any other person to do so, (d) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other party, (e) speaking negatively about the other party within the hearing or presence of the children (or either of them), (f) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children (or either of them) and from permitting any other person to do so, and (g) from otherwise exposing the children (or either of them) to family violence.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other party, (e) speaking negatively about the other party within the hearing or presence of the children (or either of them), (f) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children (or either of them) and from permitting any other person to do so, and (g) from otherwise exposing the children (or either of them) to family violence.   speaking negatively about the other party within the hearing or presence of the children (or either of them), (f) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children (or either of them) and from permitting any other person to do so, and (g) from otherwise exposing the children (or either of them) to family violence.   discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children (or either of them) and from permitting any other person to do so, and (g) from otherwise exposing the children (or either of them) to family violence.   from otherwise exposing the children (or either of them) to family violence.
courses   attend and complete, as soon as practicable a post-separation parenting program. (b) sign all documents and do all such acts and things as shall be necessary to enrol in, undertake and successfully complete the courses and programs, (c) each party pay and otherwise be responsible for all their respective costs associates with the program and courses, and (d) provide an appropriate certificate of completion of the program and the courses to the other party’s solicitors.   sign all documents and do all such acts and things as shall be necessary to enrol in, undertake and successfully complete the courses and programs, (c) each party pay and otherwise be responsible for all their respective costs associates with the program and courses, and (d) provide an appropriate certificate of completion of the program and the courses to the other party’s solicitors.   each party pay and otherwise be responsible for all their respective costs associates with the program and courses, and (d) provide an appropriate certificate of completion of the program and the courses to the other party’s solicitors.   provide an appropriate certificate of completion of the program and the courses to the other party’s solicitors.
property
valuations
financial disclosure  individual tax returns and notices of assessment for the past three (3) financial years, (b) tax returns, notices of assessment and profit and loss statements for all businesses in which the parties hold an interest for the part three financial years. (c) payslips for the past six (6) weeks, (d) redbook valuations for all vehicles registered in the party’s names or in the party’s possession, (e) evidence as to the value of any shares, asset holdings or financial resources, (f) statements for all bank accounts (including mortgage or loan accounts) held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the party) for the past two (2) years, (g) statements of all credit card accounts held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (h) statements of all liabilities held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (i) a current statement for each superannuation account held by the party, (j) any and all documents in relation to the wife’s medical negligence claim including anticipated funds to be received, including all affidavits filed by the parties in relation to those proceedings, (k) such other documents as may be reasonably requested in writing.   tax returns, notices of assessment and profit and loss statements for all businesses in which the parties hold an interest for the part three financial years. (c) payslips for the past six (6) weeks, (d) redbook valuations for all vehicles registered in the party’s names or in the party’s possession, (e) evidence as to the value of any shares, asset holdings or financial resources, (f) statements for all bank accounts (including mortgage or loan accounts) held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the party) for the past two (2) years, (g) statements of all credit card accounts held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (h) statements of all liabilities held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (i) a current statement for each superannuation account held by the party, (j) any and all documents in relation to the wife’s medical negligence claim including anticipated funds to be received, including all affidavits filed by the parties in relation to those proceedings, (k) such other documents as may be reasonably requested in writing.   payslips for the past six (6) weeks, (d) redbook valuations for all vehicles registered in the party’s names or in the party’s possession, (e) evidence as to the value of any shares, asset holdings or financial resources, (f) statements for all bank accounts (including mortgage or loan accounts) held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the party) for the past two (2) years, (g) statements of all credit card accounts held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (h) statements of all liabilities held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (i) a current statement for each superannuation account held by the party, (j) any and all documents in relation to the wife’s medical negligence claim including anticipated funds to be received, including all affidavits filed by the parties in relation to those proceedings, (k) such other documents as may be reasonably requested in writing.   redbook valuations for all vehicles registered in the party’s names or in the party’s possession, (e) evidence as to the value of any shares, asset holdings or financial resources, (f) statements for all bank accounts (including mortgage or loan accounts) held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the party) for the past two (2) years, (g) statements of all credit card accounts held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (h) statements of all liabilities held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (i) a current statement for each superannuation account held by the party, (j) any and all documents in relation to the wife’s medical negligence claim including anticipated funds to be received, including all affidavits filed by the parties in relation to those proceedings, (k) such other documents as may be reasonably requested in writing.   evidence as to the value of any shares, asset holdings or financial resources, (f) statements for all bank accounts (including mortgage or loan accounts) held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the party) for the past two (2) years, (g) statements of all credit card accounts held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (h) statements of all liabilities held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (i) a current statement for each superannuation account held by the party, (j) any and all documents in relation to the wife’s medical negligence claim including anticipated funds to be received, including all affidavits filed by the parties in relation to those proceedings, (k) such other documents as may be reasonably requested in writing.   statements for all bank accounts (including mortgage or loan accounts) held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the party) for the past two (2) years, (g) statements of all credit card accounts held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (h) statements of all liabilities held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (i) a current statement for each superannuation account held by the party, (j) any and all documents in relation to the wife’s medical negligence claim including anticipated funds to be received, including all affidavits filed by the parties in relation to those proceedings, (k) such other documents as may be reasonably requested in writing.   statements of all credit card accounts held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (h) statements of all liabilities held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (i) a current statement for each superannuation account held by the party, (j) any and all documents in relation to the wife’s medical negligence claim including anticipated funds to be received, including all affidavits filed by the parties in relation to those proceedings, (k) such other documents as may be reasonably requested in writing.   statements of all liabilities held in the party’s sole name (or jointly with a third party other than the other party) for the past two (2) years, (i) a current statement for each superannuation account held by the party, (j) any and all documents in relation to the wife’s medical negligence claim including anticipated funds to be received, including all affidavits filed by the parties in relation to those proceedings, (k) such other documents as may be reasonably requested in writing.   a current statement for each superannuation account held by the party, (j) any and all documents in relation to the wife’s medical negligence claim including anticipated funds to be received, including all affidavits filed by the parties in relation to those proceedings, (k) such other documents as may be reasonably requested in writing.   any and all documents in relation to the wife’s medical negligence claim including anticipated funds to be received, including all affidavits filed by the parties in relation to those proceedings, (k) such other documents as may be reasonably requested in writing.   such other documents as may be reasonably requested in writing.
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
associate: dated: 12 december 2022
dated: 12 december 2022