last updated: 6 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
newell & warwick [2022] fedcfamc2f 1726
orders
the court orders by consent until further order that:
parental responsibility
and the court orders until further order that:
care arrangements   each alternate weekend, from 4:00pm friday until 5:00pm sunday, (b) each wednesday evening from the conclusion of school to 7:00pm, such time to occur in the city b area, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   each wednesday evening from the conclusion of school to 7:00pm, such time to occur in the city b area, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.
and the court orders by consent until further order that:
special occasions
mother’s special occasion time  on christmas day as follows: (i) from 2:00pm 24 december until 2:00pm 25 december in even numbered years. (ii) from 2:00pm 25 december until 2:00pm on 26 december in odd numbered years. (b) at easter as follows: (i) from 3:30pm on the thursday prior to good friday until 6:00pm easter saturday in even numbered years, (ii) from 6:00pm easter saturday to 10:00am on the tuesday following easter monday in odd numbered years. (c) for the children’s birthdays and the mother’s birthday: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day, from the end of school until 8:00pm. (ii) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm. (d) from 6:00pm on mother’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following mother’s day. (e) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   from 2:00pm 24 december until 2:00pm 25 december in even numbered years. (ii) from 2:00pm 25 december until 2:00pm on 26 december in odd numbered years.  ) from 2:00pm 25 december until 2:00pm on 26 december in odd numbered years.   at easter as follows: (i) from 3:30pm on the thursday prior to good friday until 6:00pm easter saturday in even numbered years, (ii) from 6:00pm easter saturday to 10:00am on the tuesday following easter monday in odd numbered years. (c) for the children’s birthdays and the mother’s birthday: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day, from the end of school until 8:00pm. (ii) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm. (d) from 6:00pm on mother’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following mother’s day. (e) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   from 3:30pm on the thursday prior to good friday until 6:00pm easter saturday in even numbered years, (ii) from 6:00pm easter saturday to 10:00am on the tuesday following easter monday in odd numbered years.  ) from 6:00pm easter saturday to 10:00am on the tuesday following easter monday in odd numbered years.   for the children’s birthdays and the mother’s birthday: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day, from the end of school until 8:00pm. (ii) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm. (d) from 6:00pm on mother’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following mother’s day. (e) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   if the birthday falls on a school day, from the end of school until 8:00pm. (ii) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm.  ) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm.   from 6:00pm on mother’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following mother’s day. (e) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.
father’s special occasion time  on christmas day as follows: (i) from 2:00pm 24 december until 2:00pm 25 december in odd numbered years. (ii) from 2:00pm 25 december until 2:00pm on 26 december in even numbered years. (b) at easter as follows: (i) from 3:30pm on the thursday prior to good friday until 6:00pm easter saturday in odd numbered years, (ii) from 6:00pm easter saturday to 10:00am on the tuesday following easter monday in even numbered years. (c) for the children’s birthdays and the father’s birthday: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day, from the end of school until 8:00pm. (ii) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm. (d) from 6:00pm on father’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following father’s day. (e) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   from 2:00pm 24 december until 2:00pm 25 december in odd numbered years. (ii) from 2:00pm 25 december until 2:00pm on 26 december in even numbered years.  ) from 2:00pm 25 december until 2:00pm on 26 december in even numbered years.   at easter as follows: (i) from 3:30pm on the thursday prior to good friday until 6:00pm easter saturday in odd numbered years, (ii) from 6:00pm easter saturday to 10:00am on the tuesday following easter monday in even numbered years. (c) for the children’s birthdays and the father’s birthday: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day, from the end of school until 8:00pm. (ii) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm. (d) from 6:00pm on father’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following father’s day. (e) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   from 3:30pm on the thursday prior to good friday until 6:00pm easter saturday in odd numbered years, (ii) from 6:00pm easter saturday to 10:00am on the tuesday following easter monday in even numbered years.  ) from 6:00pm easter saturday to 10:00am on the tuesday following easter monday in even numbered years.   for the children’s birthdays and the father’s birthday: (i) if the birthday falls on a school day, from the end of school until 8:00pm. (ii) if the birthday does not fall on a school day, from 11:00am until 4:00pm. (d) from 6:00pm on father’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following father’s day. (e) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   from 6:00pm on father’s day eve until the commencement of school on the monday following father’s day. (e) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.
holiday time   with the mother for one week of the school holidays, with such time to commence at 5:00pm on the first friday of the holidays and conclude at 5:00pm on the middle friday of the holidays, (b) with the father for one week of the school holidays, with such time to commence at 5:00pm on the middle friday of the holidays and conclude on the monday at the commencement of the following school term, and (c) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   with the father for one week of the school holidays, with such time to commence at 5:00pm on the middle friday of the holidays and conclude on the monday at the commencement of the following school term, and (c) such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.
communication
changeover
information   school newsletters. (b) copies of the children’s school reports. (c) order forms for the children’s school photos. (d) notices of school functions such as parent teacher interviews, concerts, fetes and sports days.   copies of the children’s school reports. (c) order forms for the children’s school photos. (d) notices of school functions such as parent teacher interviews, concerts, fetes and sports days.   order forms for the children’s school photos. (d) notices of school functions such as parent teacher interviews, concerts, fetes and sports days.   notices of school functions such as parent teacher interviews, concerts, fetes and sports days.
non-denigration  abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking, or otherwise denigrating the other party and (b) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children (or any of them) and from permitting any other person to do so.   discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in or intended for use in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children (or any of them) and from permitting any other person to do so.
procedural   any views expressed by the children and any matters (such as the children’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (b) the matters set out in ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 (cth), (c) the impact upon the children and upon the children’s relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, (d) the impact upon the children and upon children’s relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, (e) the impact of the mother’s relocation to town c, (f) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   the matters set out in ss 60cc, 61da and 65daa of the family law act 1975 (cth), (c) the impact upon the children and upon the children’s relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, (d) the impact upon the children and upon children’s relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, (e) the impact of the mother’s relocation to town c, (f) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   the impact upon the children and upon the children’s relationship with the mother if the court made orders as sought by the father, (d) the impact upon the children and upon children’s relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, (e) the impact of the mother’s relocation to town c, (f) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   the impact upon the children and upon children’s relationship with the father if the court made orders as sought by the mother, (e) the impact of the mother’s relocation to town c, (f) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   the impact of the mother’s relocation to town c, (f) any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   any other matters that the court child expert/family consultant considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   a list of the application/response and all affidavits to be relied upon including the dates of filing, (b) a brief chronology of relevant events, (c) a precise minute of the orders the party is seeking, and (d) a list of authorities to be relied upon, if any.   a brief chronology of relevant events, (c) a precise minute of the orders the party is seeking, and (d) a list of authorities to be relied upon, if any.   a precise minute of the orders the party is seeking, and (d) a list of authorities to be relied upon, if any.   a list of authorities to be relied upon, if any.
and the court notes that:
reasons for res tempore judgment
urgent interim orders that all times be abridged to allow this application to be heard by this honourable court this day as a matter of urgency. that the father shall have leave to proceed with his application for interim orders this day on an ex-parte basis. that pursuant to section 60i(9)(b) and (d) of the family law act 1975 the father be permitted to proceed with this application for parenting orders without providing this honourable court with a certificate pursuant to section 60i(8) of the family law act 1975. recovery order if the children... have not been returned to the father at the date of the first return of this application, a recovery order do issue authorising/directing the marshal, all officers of the australian federal police and all officers of the police forces of all the states and territories of the commonwealth of australia, with such assistance as may be required, and if necessary by force: (a) to find and recover the children... (b) to deliver the said children to the father at [d street, town e], in the state of victoria, or such other place as the father and the person effecting such recovery agree to be appropriate, and (c) to stop and search any vehicle, vessel, or aircraft and to enter and search any premises or place in which there is at any time reasonable cause to believe that the said child, may be found. a copy of these orders be faxed immediately to the australian federal police operations coordination centre by the melbourne registry of the federal circuit and family court of australia. [[x]] be forthwith re-enrolled at [secondary school a]... and [[y]] and [[z]] be forthwith reenrolled at [primary school a]. parental responsibility the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children... care arrangements in the event that the mother does not return to the [city b] area with the children, the children live with the father. until further order, the children spend time with the mother, during the school term, as follows:   to find and recover the children... (b) to deliver the said children to the father at [d street, town e], in the state of victoria, or such other place as the father and the person effecting such recovery agree to be appropriate, and (c) to stop and search any vehicle, vessel, or aircraft and to enter and search any premises or place in which there is at any time reasonable cause to believe that the said child, may be found.   to deliver the said children to the father at [d street, town e], in the state of victoria, or such other place as the father and the person effecting such recovery agree to be appropriate, and (c) to stop and search any vehicle, vessel, or aircraft and to enter and search any premises or place in which there is at any time reasonable cause to believe that the said child, may be found.   to stop and search any vehicle, vessel, or aircraft and to enter and search any premises or place in which there is at any time reasonable cause to believe that the said child, may be found.   each alternate weekend, from 5:00pm friday until 5:00pm sunday, (b) each wednesday evening from 5:00pm to 8:00pm, such time to occur in the [city b] area, and (c) such other times as may be agreed between the parties in writing.   each wednesday evening from 5:00pm to 8:00pm, such time to occur in the [city b] area, and
...
1. the children live with the respondent mother. the children [y] and [z] spend time with the applicant father alternate weekends from 4.00pm friday to sunday 4.00pm. the child [[x]] spend time with the applicant father alternate weekends from 4.00pm friday to sunday 4.00pm, subject to his wishes. that changeover shall take place: (a) by the applicant father picking the children up at [f street, town g] on a friday, and (b) by the respondent mother picking the children [y] and [z] up from the father at his residence at [h street, town j] on a sunday.   by the applicant father picking the children up at [f street, town g] on a friday, and (b) by the respondent mother picking the children [y] and [z] up from the father at his residence at [h street, town j] on a sunday.   by the respondent mother picking the children [y] and [z] up from the father at his residence at [h street, town j] on a sunday.   each school night, from the conclusion of school until approximately 7:00pm, (b) each alternate weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday until 4:00pm on sunday,   each alternate weekend, from the conclusion of school on friday until 4:00pm on sunday,   for two weeks of the school holidays each year, and (d) on special occasions. i have been responsible for picking up the children from school each afternoon and delivering them to [the mother’s] house. i start work early, between 4:00am and 6:00am, and finish work at 3:00pm, which allows me to collect the children each school day. i take the children to their respective extra-curricular activities after school.
... the above parenting arrangements were in place for 6 years and the children have been happy and well-settled in their routines. the children have benefited from having regular contact and a strong bond with both [the mother] and i. on 18 august 2022, [the mother] told me that she intended to relocate with the children to [[town g]] to live with her new boyfriend, [[mr k]], and that she intended to move during the september/october school holidays at the conclusion of term 3.
64. the children still spend alternate weekends with [the father]. [the father] picks the children up from my property in [[town g]] on friday 4.30pm and i pick them up from his sister's property on sunday at approximately 4.00pm. in the last month, [[x]] has refused to spend time with [the father]. when [the father] has come to pick up the children from [[town g]], [[x]] has refused to go with [the father] and states that he wants to stay with me permanently. i have encouraged [[x]] to spend time with [the father], but he has refused to spend time with him. ... paragraph 28a is disputed. there was never an agreement that he spends time with the children every school night from 3.20pm to 7.00pm. the agreement was that the children live with me and spend alternate weekends with [the father] as well as special events. [the father] was also to spend 2 weeks with the children in the school holidays each year. 79. paragraph 29 is disputed. paragraph 33 is disputed. the arrangements contained in [the father’s] affidavit have not been in place for 6 years. [the father] would assist with travel arrangements were needed in the last 12 months. he didn't spend each school day from 3.20pm to 7.00pm with the children. it is disputed the children are happy with the arrangements which has been evidenced by the fact that [[x]] refuses to spend any time with his father. ... my proposed orders to not set to reduce the time [the father] spends with the children. i still wish for him to continue spending alternate weekends with the children and 2 weeks in the school holidays.
... in making interim decisions the court will still often be faced with conflicting facts, little helpful evidence and disputes between the parents as to what constitutes the best interests of the child. however, the legislative pathway must be followed. 82. in an interim case that would involve the following:   identifying the competing proposals of the parties, (b) identifying the issues in dispute in the interim hearing, (c) identifying any agreed or uncontested relevant facts, (d) considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   considering the matters in s 60cc that are relevant and, if possible, making findings about them (in interim proceedings there may be little uncontested evidence to enable more than a limited consideration of these matters to take place), (e) deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   deciding whether the presumption in s 61da that equal shared parental responsibility is in the best interests of the child applies or does not apply because there are reasonable grounds to believe there has been abuse of the child or family violence or, in an interim matter, the court does not consider it appropriate to apply the presumption, (f) if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption does apply, deciding whether it is rebutted because application of it would not be in the child’s best interests, (g) if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption applies and is not rebutted, considering making an order that the child spend equal time with the parents unless it is contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (h) if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if equal time is found not to be in the child’s best interests, considering making an order that the child spend substantial and significant time as defined in s 65daa(3) with the parents, unless contrary to the child’s best interests as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, or impracticable, (i) if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if neither equal time nor substantial and significant time is considered to be in the best interests of the child, then making such orders in the discretion of the court that are in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, (j) if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   if the presumption is not applied or is rebutted, then making such order as is in the best interests of the child, as a result of consideration of one or more of the matters in s 60cc, and (k) even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.   even then the court may need to consider equal time or substantial and significant time, especially if one of the parties has sought it or, even if neither has sought it, if the court considers after affording procedural fairness to the parties it to be in the best interests of the child.
legal authorities ] before dealing with these grounds of appeal individually, it is worthwhile recalling the statements of principle proscribing the power to make orders which are, in effect, mandatory injunctions, forcing parents to live in places against their will so as to fulfil the statutory mandate to accord paramount importance to the children's best interests. [27] there is an inherent tension between, on the one hand, separated parents being able to establish new homes wherever they like and, on the other, their restraint by injunction from living too far apart to avoid any impingement of their children's ability to retain meaningful relationships with both parents. the conflict is between the best interests of the children to know and have regular personal contact with each parent and the interests of the parents to enjoy a high measure of freedom of movement which is not lost by reason only of their parental responsibility for the children (see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 (“ams v aif”) at 196, 206, 207-208, 210). the tension at the intersection of those conflicting interests is even greater when an order is sought, not just to restrain one parent's move further away, but to compel the parent who has already moved away to return and establish a new residence closer to the other parent. [28] while the children's interests are paramount, their interests are not the sole determinant of parenting orders under part vii of the act (ams v aif at 207, 225, 230, u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 ("u v u") at 282). parents enjoy as much freedom to live where they please as is compatible with their obligations pertaining to the children (see ams v aif at 223-224, 231-232, sampson and hartnett (no.10) [2007] famca 1365, (2007) flc 93-350, zanda & zanda [2014] famcafc 173, (2014) flc 93-607 at [132]- [136]). only when the children's welfare would be adversely affected must a parent's right to freedom of mobility defer to the paramount consideration of the children's best interests (see u v u at 262).  ] there is an inherent tension between, on the one hand, separated parents being able to establish new homes wherever they like and, on the other, their restraint by injunction from living too far apart to avoid any impingement of their children's ability to retain meaningful relationships with both parents. the conflict is between the best interests of the children to know and have regular personal contact with each parent and the interests of the parents to enjoy a high measure of freedom of movement which is not lost by reason only of their parental responsibility for the children (see ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 (“ams v aif”) at 196, 206, 207-208, 210). the tension at the intersection of those conflicting interests is even greater when an order is sought, not just to restrain one parent's move further away, but to compel the parent who has already moved away to return and establish a new residence closer to the other parent. [28] while the children's interests are paramount, their interests are not the sole determinant of parenting orders under part vii of the act (ams v aif at 207, 225, 230, u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 ("u v u") at 282). parents enjoy as much freedom to live where they please as is compatible with their obligations pertaining to the children (see ams v aif at 223-224, 231-232, sampson and hartnett (no.10) [2007] famca 1365, (2007) flc 93-350, zanda & zanda [2014] famcafc 173, (2014) flc 93-607 at [132]- [136]). only when the children's welfare would be adversely affected must a parent's right to freedom of mobility defer to the paramount consideration of the children's best interests (see u v u at 262).  ] while the children's interests are paramount, their interests are not the sole determinant of parenting orders under part vii of the act (ams v aif at 207, 225, 230, u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 ("u v u") at 282). parents enjoy as much freedom to live where they please as is compatible with their obligations pertaining to the children (see ams v aif at 223-224, 231-232, sampson and hartnett (no.10) [2007] famca 1365, (2007) flc 93-350, zanda & zanda [2014] famcafc 173, (2014) flc 93-607 at [132]- [136]). only when the children's welfare would be adversely affected must a parent's right to freedom of mobility defer to the paramount consideration of the children's best interests (see u v u at 262).  1] first, to impose upon a custodial (or residence) parent the obligation to demonstrate "compelling reasons" to justify relocation of that parent's residence, with consequent relocation of the residence of the child, is not warranted either by the statutory instructions to regard as paramount the welfare of the child or by the practicalities affecting parents. parents enjoy as much freedom as is compatible with their obligations with regard to the child. the freedom continues, including with respect to their entitlement to live where they choose. at least in the case of a proposed relocation within australia, the need to demonstrate "compelling reasons" imposes on a custodial parent an unreasonable inhibition. it effectively ties that parent to an obligation of physical proximity to a person with whom, by definition, the personal relationship which gave rise to the birth of the child has finished or at least significantly altered.  phasis added)
at common law individuals may move about as they see fit. but that freedom is subject to the laws of the land. hence parents enjoy as much freedom to live where they wish as is compatible with their obligations with regard to their child or children and the laws of the land, see kirby j in ams v aif, cited in franklyn, at [191]. the constitutional law principles discussed in gerner do not conflict with the principles summarised in franklyn. in any event i am bound by franklyn.
section 65dac effect of parenting order that provides for shared parental responsibility 1. this section applies if, under a parenting order:   2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long-term issue in relation to the child.   the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long-term issue in relation to the child.
2. the order is taken to require the decision to be made jointly by those persons. note: subject to any court orders, decisions about issues that are not major long-term issues are made by the person with whom the child is spending time without a need to consult the other person (see section 65dae). 3. the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue. to avoid doubt, this section does not require any other person to establish, before acting on a decision about the child communicated by one of those persons, that the decision has been made jointly.  ] it is illogical to suggest it is appropriate for an unauthorised unilateral move to occur, and that a court's discretion in determining a child's best interests, including time to be spent with the other parent, be inappropriately fettered by a move which has already occurred.  ] the act does not contain any presumption against a parenting order which involves relocation, nor any presumption in favour of a parent, with whom a child lives predominantly at the time of the application obtain such an order. the act provides for the careful exercise of a structured discretion to determine the appropriate order to be made. [75] it is clear that if a parenting order for equal shared parental responsibility has been made prior to any parenting application involving a relocation, the parties have a primary duty under s 65dac to determine jointly if proposed living arrangements for a child would make it significantly more difficult for that child to spend time with the “left behind” parent. [77] the requirements of s 65dac, properly observed, therefore require parents to consult and make a genuine effort to agree about a move which would make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with the "left behind" parent. the operation of s 65dac, when applicable, clearly precludes a unilateral move by one parent without notice and consultation with the other parent.  ] it is clear that if a parenting order for equal shared parental responsibility has been made prior to any parenting application involving a relocation, the parties have a primary duty under s 65dac to determine jointly if proposed living arrangements for a child would make it significantly more difficult for that child to spend time with the “left behind” parent. [77] the requirements of s 65dac, properly observed, therefore require parents to consult and make a genuine effort to agree about a move which would make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with the "left behind" parent. the operation of s 65dac, when applicable, clearly precludes a unilateral move by one parent without notice and consultation with the other parent.  ] the requirements of s 65dac, properly observed, therefore require parents to consult and make a genuine effort to agree about a move which would make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with the "left behind" parent. the operation of s 65dac, when applicable, clearly precludes a unilateral move by one parent without notice and consultation with the other parent.
...while it is undoubted that the court's function is not fettered by a unilateral relocation by a parent, the determination of whether such a move is in a child's best interests involves a careful consideration of all of the factors relevant to that determination (see morgan & miles... at [55])  ] to order someone to relocate to another place will require the court to be satisfied that the practicalities of life equally or sufficiently exist in the place to which the party is required to move. one would therefore reasonably expect a close analysis of the moving party’s capacity and/or the other parties’ capacity to provide for such practicalities having regard to the orders proposed by the court. it is probably only in the circumstance of significant wealth of both parties that it might reasonably be inferred that the practicalities of life could be met without detailed inquiry.  e [75] of sampson & harnett)  ] in sampson this court thus made it plain that “[t]he proper exercise of such a power is likely to be rare” and orders made pursuant to an exercise of that discretion would be “...at the extreme end of the discretionary range...” (sampson at [58] and [83]). it follows that there should exist “rare” or “extreme” factors that warrant the court exercising its discretion to make “coercive” orders requiring a parent to relocate so as to continue to be the primary carer of their child/ children (sampson at [17]).  e [37] of adamson & adamson [2014] famcafc 232, (2014) flc 93-622)  ] it may be accepted, as it was in this case, that the court has power to make a coercive order. importantly though, it is well established that the proper exercise of that power is “at the extreme end of the discretionary range” and there should exist “rare” or “extreme” factors that warrant the court exercising its discretion to make a coercive order requiring a parent to relocate so as to continue to perform the role of primary caregiver of children. [17] consequently, as emphasised by the full court in d and sv and by the full court in sampson and hartnett (no 10) (supra), there is an imperative for the court to explore and consider alternatives to restricting freedom of movement, particularly when the coercive order will require a party to relocate contrary to that party’s proposal, and involve a primary caregiver undertaking that role in a place not of that parent’s choosing.  ] consequently, as emphasised by the full court in d and sv and by the full court in sampson and hartnett (no 10) (supra), there is an imperative for the court to explore and consider alternatives to restricting freedom of movement, particularly when the coercive order will require a party to relocate contrary to that party’s proposal, and involve a primary caregiver undertaking that role in a place not of that parent’s choosing.  tations omitted)  ] ... there remains a clear difference as to how a court addresses a requirement to remain in an area, as opposed to a requirement to actually pack up and move.
associate: dated: 21 december 2022
dated: 21 december 2022