last updated: 20 december 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
marella & marella [2022] fedcfamc2f 1564
orders
the court notes that:
on a final basis in relation to parenting, the court orders that:
parental responsibility
live with
spends time with arrangements  for a period of 3 months (and for no less than 6 visits between the child and psychologist), the father be permitted to provide to the child’s psychologist cards, gifts and letters to the child to be passed onto the child during therapy sessions, and (b) following the period set out in order 10 (a), for a further period of 3 months (and for no less than 6 visits between the child and psychologist), in addition to providing cards, gifts and letters to the child as per order 10 (a), the father be permitted to speak with the child via facetime or telephone, with such communication to occur with the child during therapy sessions, and (c) for the purpose of order 10, the therapist is permitted to read any cards or written material before they are passed onto the child, and (d) for the purpose of order 10, the therapist may use their discretion to decline to pass on any cards or gifts if the therapist forms the view that the child is not yet ready to receive these items or if they are inappropriate and will advise the father and provide feedback about this decision.   following the period set out in order 10 (a), for a further period of 3 months (and for no less than 6 visits between the child and psychologist), in addition to providing cards, gifts and letters to the child as per order 10 (a), the father be permitted to speak with the child via facetime or telephone, with such communication to occur with the child during therapy sessions, and (c) for the purpose of order 10, the therapist is permitted to read any cards or written material before they are passed onto the child, and (d) for the purpose of order 10, the therapist may use their discretion to decline to pass on any cards or gifts if the therapist forms the view that the child is not yet ready to receive these items or if they are inappropriate and will advise the father and provide feedback about this decision.   for the purpose of order 10, the therapist is permitted to read any cards or written material before they are passed onto the child, and (d) for the purpose of order 10, the therapist may use their discretion to decline to pass on any cards or gifts if the therapist forms the view that the child is not yet ready to receive these items or if they are inappropriate and will advise the father and provide feedback about this decision.   for the purpose of order 10, the therapist may use their discretion to decline to pass on any cards or gifts if the therapist forms the view that the child is not yet ready to receive these items or if they are inappropriate and will advise the father and provide feedback about this decision.   the father’s time with the child is conditional is upon the father’s compliance with orders 22, 23 and 24. (b) both parties must do all things necessary to complete the intake and assessment process required by the city b and are to follow all reasonable directions of the city b. (c) no other members of the paternal family are to attend the supervised visits between x and the father within the first 4 months. (d) the mother is to bring the child to the city b for the purposes of facilitating supervised time with the father. should the mother be unable to do so, the maternal grandfather may do so.   both parties must do all things necessary to complete the intake and assessment process required by the city b and are to follow all reasonable directions of the city b. (c) no other members of the paternal family are to attend the supervised visits between x and the father within the first 4 months. (d) the mother is to bring the child to the city b for the purposes of facilitating supervised time with the father. should the mother be unable to do so, the maternal grandfather may do so.   no other members of the paternal family are to attend the supervised visits between x and the father within the first 4 months. (d) the mother is to bring the child to the city b for the purposes of facilitating supervised time with the father. should the mother be unable to do so, the maternal grandfather may do so.   the mother is to bring the child to the city b for the purposes of facilitating supervised time with the father. should the mother be unable to do so, the maternal grandfather may do so.   for a period of 3 months, on each alternate saturday and sunday from 10.00am until 1.00pm, and (b) following the 3 month period specified in order 14 (a), for a period of 3 months, on each alternate saturday and sunday from 10.00am until 4.00pm on each day, and (c) following the 3 month period specified in order 14 (b), for a period of 3 months on each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday (d) following the 3 month period specified in order 14 (c), thereafter the child will spend time with the father as follows: (i) each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday, or 4.00pm on a non-school day, until 4.00pm sunday, with these weekend periods to commence on the first friday of each school term, (ii) in even numbered years, the child will spend the first half of all term and summer school holidays with the father with such time to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of term and conclude at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays, (iii) in odd numbered years, the child will spend the second half of all term and summer school holidays with the father in odd numbered years with such time to commence at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays and conclude at 4.00pm on the last sunday of the school holidays, (iv) for 3 hours on the child’s birthday in the event the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, and (v) on father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00pm if a non-school day) until 4.00pm sunday. (e) for the purpose of order 14, changeover is to occur as follows: (i) on non-school days, the mother is to deliver the child to a member of the paternal family, including the paternal grandparent/s or paternal aunt or uncle at the city c library at the commencement of time and collecting the child from the grandparents at the city c library at the conclusion of time. (ii) on school days the father (along with a paternal family member) are to collect the child from school on friday afternoon and at the conclusion of the father’s time with the child, are to return the child to the mother at the city c library.   following the 3 month period specified in order 14 (a), for a period of 3 months, on each alternate saturday and sunday from 10.00am until 4.00pm on each day, and (c) following the 3 month period specified in order 14 (b), for a period of 3 months on each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday (d) following the 3 month period specified in order 14 (c), thereafter the child will spend time with the father as follows: (i) each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday, or 4.00pm on a non-school day, until 4.00pm sunday, with these weekend periods to commence on the first friday of each school term, (ii) in even numbered years, the child will spend the first half of all term and summer school holidays with the father with such time to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of term and conclude at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays, (iii) in odd numbered years, the child will spend the second half of all term and summer school holidays with the father in odd numbered years with such time to commence at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays and conclude at 4.00pm on the last sunday of the school holidays, (iv) for 3 hours on the child’s birthday in the event the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, and (v) on father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00pm if a non-school day) until 4.00pm sunday. (e) for the purpose of order 14, changeover is to occur as follows: (i) on non-school days, the mother is to deliver the child to a member of the paternal family, including the paternal grandparent/s or paternal aunt or uncle at the city c library at the commencement of time and collecting the child from the grandparents at the city c library at the conclusion of time. (ii) on school days the father (along with a paternal family member) are to collect the child from school on friday afternoon and at the conclusion of the father’s time with the child, are to return the child to the mother at the city c library.   following the 3 month period specified in order 14 (b), for a period of 3 months on each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday (d) following the 3 month period specified in order 14 (c), thereafter the child will spend time with the father as follows: (i) each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday, or 4.00pm on a non-school day, until 4.00pm sunday, with these weekend periods to commence on the first friday of each school term, (ii) in even numbered years, the child will spend the first half of all term and summer school holidays with the father with such time to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of term and conclude at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays, (iii) in odd numbered years, the child will spend the second half of all term and summer school holidays with the father in odd numbered years with such time to commence at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays and conclude at 4.00pm on the last sunday of the school holidays, (iv) for 3 hours on the child’s birthday in the event the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, and (v) on father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00pm if a non-school day) until 4.00pm sunday. (e) for the purpose of order 14, changeover is to occur as follows: (i) on non-school days, the mother is to deliver the child to a member of the paternal family, including the paternal grandparent/s or paternal aunt or uncle at the city c library at the commencement of time and collecting the child from the grandparents at the city c library at the conclusion of time. (ii) on school days the father (along with a paternal family member) are to collect the child from school on friday afternoon and at the conclusion of the father’s time with the child, are to return the child to the mother at the city c library.   following the 3 month period specified in order 14 (c), thereafter the child will spend time with the father as follows: (i) each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday, or 4.00pm on a non-school day, until 4.00pm sunday, with these weekend periods to commence on the first friday of each school term, (ii) in even numbered years, the child will spend the first half of all term and summer school holidays with the father with such time to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of term and conclude at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays, (iii) in odd numbered years, the child will spend the second half of all term and summer school holidays with the father in odd numbered years with such time to commence at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays and conclude at 4.00pm on the last sunday of the school holidays, (iv) for 3 hours on the child’s birthday in the event the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, and (v) on father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00pm if a non-school day) until 4.00pm sunday. (e) for the purpose of order 14, changeover is to occur as follows: (i) on non-school days, the mother is to deliver the child to a member of the paternal family, including the paternal grandparent/s or paternal aunt or uncle at the city c library at the commencement of time and collecting the child from the grandparents at the city c library at the conclusion of time. (ii) on school days the father (along with a paternal family member) are to collect the child from school on friday afternoon and at the conclusion of the father’s time with the child, are to return the child to the mother at the city c library.   each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday, or 4.00pm on a non-school day, until 4.00pm sunday, with these weekend periods to commence on the first friday of each school term, (ii) in even numbered years, the child will spend the first half of all term and summer school holidays with the father with such time to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of term and conclude at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays, (iii) in odd numbered years, the child will spend the second half of all term and summer school holidays with the father in odd numbered years with such time to commence at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays and conclude at 4.00pm on the last sunday of the school holidays, (iv) for 3 hours on the child’s birthday in the event the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, and (v) on father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00pm if a non-school day) until 4.00pm sunday.  ) in even numbered years, the child will spend the first half of all term and summer school holidays with the father with such time to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of term and conclude at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays, (iii) in odd numbered years, the child will spend the second half of all term and summer school holidays with the father in odd numbered years with such time to commence at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays and conclude at 4.00pm on the last sunday of the school holidays, (iv) for 3 hours on the child’s birthday in the event the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, and (v) on father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00pm if a non-school day) until 4.00pm sunday.  i) in odd numbered years, the child will spend the second half of all term and summer school holidays with the father in odd numbered years with such time to commence at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays and conclude at 4.00pm on the last sunday of the school holidays, (iv) for 3 hours on the child’s birthday in the event the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, and (v) on father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00pm if a non-school day) until 4.00pm sunday.  ) for 3 hours on the child’s birthday in the event the child is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders, and (v) on father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00pm if a non-school day) until 4.00pm sunday.   on father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00pm if a non-school day) until 4.00pm sunday.   for the purpose of order 14, changeover is to occur as follows: (i) on non-school days, the mother is to deliver the child to a member of the paternal family, including the paternal grandparent/s or paternal aunt or uncle at the city c library at the commencement of time and collecting the child from the grandparents at the city c library at the conclusion of time. (ii) on school days the father (along with a paternal family member) are to collect the child from school on friday afternoon and at the conclusion of the father’s time with the child, are to return the child to the mother at the city c library.   on non-school days, the mother is to deliver the child to a member of the paternal family, including the paternal grandparent/s or paternal aunt or uncle at the city c library at the commencement of time and collecting the child from the grandparents at the city c library at the conclusion of time. (ii) on school days the father (along with a paternal family member) are to collect the child from school on friday afternoon and at the conclusion of the father’s time with the child, are to return the child to the mother at the city c library.  ) on school days the father (along with a paternal family member) are to collect the child from school on friday afternoon and at the conclusion of the father’s time with the child, are to return the child to the mother at the city c library.   the father’s compliance with orders 22, 23 and 24, and (b) that contact between the father and child in orders 14 (a) – (b) being supervised at all times by either the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt, ms d, or the paternal uncle, mr e, (c) the contact between the father and child in orders 14 (c) – (d) occurring in the presence/substantial attendance of either the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt, ms d, or the paternal uncle, mr e, (d) all overnight periods in orders 14 (c) – (d) occurring at the home of the paternal grandparents, paternal aunt, ms d, or the paternal uncle, mr e, and (e) the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt and paternal uncle sign an undertaking prepared by the independent children’s lawyer and file it with the court prior to time in order 14 occurring, regarding their primary, protective responsibilities towards the child.   that contact between the father and child in orders 14 (a) – (b) being supervised at all times by either the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt, ms d, or the paternal uncle, mr e, (c) the contact between the father and child in orders 14 (c) – (d) occurring in the presence/substantial attendance of either the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt, ms d, or the paternal uncle, mr e, (d) all overnight periods in orders 14 (c) – (d) occurring at the home of the paternal grandparents, paternal aunt, ms d, or the paternal uncle, mr e, and (e) the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt and paternal uncle sign an undertaking prepared by the independent children’s lawyer and file it with the court prior to time in order 14 occurring, regarding their primary, protective responsibilities towards the child.   the contact between the father and child in orders 14 (c) – (d) occurring in the presence/substantial attendance of either the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt, ms d, or the paternal uncle, mr e, (d) all overnight periods in orders 14 (c) – (d) occurring at the home of the paternal grandparents, paternal aunt, ms d, or the paternal uncle, mr e, and (e) the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt and paternal uncle sign an undertaking prepared by the independent children’s lawyer and file it with the court prior to time in order 14 occurring, regarding their primary, protective responsibilities towards the child.   all overnight periods in orders 14 (c) – (d) occurring at the home of the paternal grandparents, paternal aunt, ms d, or the paternal uncle, mr e, and (e) the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt and paternal uncle sign an undertaking prepared by the independent children’s lawyer and file it with the court prior to time in order 14 occurring, regarding their primary, protective responsibilities towards the child.   the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt and paternal uncle sign an undertaking prepared by the independent children’s lawyer and file it with the court prior to time in order 14 occurring, regarding their primary, protective responsibilities towards the child.
child psychologist  complete all required documentation including the intake form, and (b) complete the intake process, and (c) comply with all reasonable directions and recommendations made by f counsellors with respect to the child’s engagement with and attendance upon f counsellors, and (d) do all things necessary to obtain a mental health care plan for the child to minimise the costs of attendance at individual counselling. in the event that there is a shortfall in the costs of counselling, both parties are to be equally responsible for those costs, (e) provide confirmation to the father via email, or via his solicitor, that she has complied with orders 17 and 18.   complete the intake process, and (c) comply with all reasonable directions and recommendations made by f counsellors with respect to the child’s engagement with and attendance upon f counsellors, and (d) do all things necessary to obtain a mental health care plan for the child to minimise the costs of attendance at individual counselling. in the event that there is a shortfall in the costs of counselling, both parties are to be equally responsible for those costs, (e) provide confirmation to the father via email, or via his solicitor, that she has complied with orders 17 and 18.   comply with all reasonable directions and recommendations made by f counsellors with respect to the child’s engagement with and attendance upon f counsellors, and (d) do all things necessary to obtain a mental health care plan for the child to minimise the costs of attendance at individual counselling. in the event that there is a shortfall in the costs of counselling, both parties are to be equally responsible for those costs, (e) provide confirmation to the father via email, or via his solicitor, that she has complied with orders 17 and 18.   do all things necessary to obtain a mental health care plan for the child to minimise the costs of attendance at individual counselling. in the event that there is a shortfall in the costs of counselling, both parties are to be equally responsible for those costs, (e) provide confirmation to the father via email, or via his solicitor, that she has complied with orders 17 and 18.   provide confirmation to the father via email, or via his solicitor, that she has complied with orders 17 and 18.   comply with all recommendations and directions made by x’s therapist with respect to contact between the child and father.   these orders, (b) the expert report of dr h dated 22 september 2020, (c) the family report of ms n dated 14 february 2022, and (d) the assessment of ms marella completed by ms k dated 11 april 2022.   the expert report of dr h dated 22 september 2020, (c) the family report of ms n dated 14 february 2022, and (d) the assessment of ms marella completed by ms k dated 11 april 2022.   the family report of ms n dated 14 february 2022, and (d) the assessment of ms marella completed by ms k dated 11 april 2022.   the assessment of ms marella completed by ms k dated 11 april 2022.
supports for the mother  make an appointment with her clinical/forensic psychologist and provide the details of her psychologist to the father via his solicitor, (b) comply with the recommendations as to ongoing attendance and treatment made by the clinical/forensic psychologist, and (c) provide a copy of the following documents to the psychologist: (i) these orders, (ii) the expert report dated 22 september 2020, (iii) the family report dated 14 february 2022. (iv) the assessments of ms marella completed by ms k dated 11 april 2022.   comply with the recommendations as to ongoing attendance and treatment made by the clinical/forensic psychologist, and (c) provide a copy of the following documents to the psychologist: (i) these orders, (ii) the expert report dated 22 september 2020, (iii) the family report dated 14 february 2022. (iv) the assessments of ms marella completed by ms k dated 11 april 2022.   provide a copy of the following documents to the psychologist: (i) these orders, (ii) the expert report dated 22 september 2020, (iii) the family report dated 14 february 2022. (iv) the assessments of ms marella completed by ms k dated 11 april 2022.   these orders, (ii) the expert report dated 22 september 2020, (iii) the family report dated 14 february 2022. (iv) the assessments of ms marella completed by ms k dated 11 april 2022.  ) the expert report dated 22 september 2020, (iii) the family report dated 14 february 2022. (iv) the assessments of ms marella completed by ms k dated 11 april 2022.  i) the family report dated 14 february 2022. (iv) the assessments of ms marella completed by ms k dated 11 april 2022.  ) the assessments of ms marella completed by ms k dated 11 april 2022.
supports for the father  the father has failed to comply with the recommendations of treatment, or (b) the father has failed to comply with recommendations as to his attendance upon the treating practitioner.   the father has failed to comply with recommendations as to his attendance upon the treating practitioner.
authorities for child’s psychologist and contact centre
miscellaneous  respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the child about the personal life of the other parent, (b) speak to the other parent respectfully, and (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent   speak to the other parent respectfully, and (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent   not denigrate or insult the other parent and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
orders sought by the applicant father
orders: that all previous parenting orders be and are hereby discharged. parental responsibility that the mother, [ms marella], have sole parental responsibility for the child [x] born [in] 2015 (“x”). the mother shall keep the father advised of the names of all medical practitioners and treating allied health practitioners that [x] attends upon and is to advise the father by email of any change within 24 hours of such change occurring. both parties are to keep the other advised of a telephone number and email address that they can be contacted on and are to advise the other of any change, by email within 24 hours of such change occurring. for the purpose of all communication about [x], this is to occur via email save for circumstances of urgency at which time they may contact each other via telephone or text message. that both parties by this order, authorise any school that [x] attends to provide to the other party copies of all information concerning [x], including but not limited to school reports examples of schoolwork, school newsletters, notification of all school activities, parent/teacher nights. the father is permitted to contact any treating medical practitioner [x] attends upon and may receive any and all information pertaining to [x]. the mother is restrained by injunction from changing [x]’s surname and the mother shall ensure that [x] is to be referred to by the name ‘[x]’ . lives with that [x] shall live with the mother. spends time with arrangements from the date of these orders, for a 6-month period as set out in orders 10 (a) and (b), the father will be permitted to communicate with the child as follows: for a period of 3 months (and for no less than 6 visits between the child and psychologist), the father be permitted to provide to the child’s psychologist cards, gifts and letters to the child to be passed onto the child during therapy sessions, and following the period set out in order 10 (a), for a further period of 3 months, in addition to providing cards, gifts and letters to the child as per order 10 (a), the father be permitted to speak with the child via facetime or telephone, with such communication to occur with the child during therapy sessions, and for the purpose of order 10, the therapist is permitted to read any cards or written material before they are passed onto the child, and for the purpose of order 10, the therapist may use their discretion to decline to pass on any cards or gifts if the therapist forms the view that the child is not yet ready to receive these items or if they are inappropriate and will advise the father and provide feedback about this decision. for the purpose of order 10 (a) and (b), the father’s time with the child is conditional upon the father’s compliance with orders 22, 23 and 24. upon conclusion of the 6-month period set out in orders 10 (a) and (b), the father will be permitted to spend time with the child at the [city b] children’s contact service on a fortnightly basis on dates and times as can be facilitated by the [city b contact service]. for the purpose of order 12: the father’s time with the child is conditional is upon the father’s compliance with orders 22, 23 and 24. both parties must do all things necessary to complete the intake and assessment process required by the [city b contact service] and are to follow all reasonable directions of the [city b contact service]. following the 6-month period of contact occurring at the [city b contact service] the father will be permitted to spend time with the child as follows: for a period of 2 months, on each alternate saturday and sunday from 10.00am until 1.00pm, and following the 2-month period specified in order 14 (a), for a period of 2 months, on each alternate saturday and sunday from 10.00am until 4.00pm on each day, and following the 2-month period specified in order 14 (b), for a period of 2 months on each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday following the 2-month period specified in order 14 (c), thereafter [x] will spend time with the father as follows: each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday, or 4.00pm on a non-school day, until 4.00pm sunday, with these weekend periods to commence on the first friday of each school term, in even numbered years, [x] will spend the first half of all term and summer school holidays with the father with such time to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of term and conclude at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays, and in odd numbered years, [x] will spend the second half of all term and summer school holidays with the father in odd numbered years with such time to commence at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays and conclude at 4.00pm on the last sunday of the school holidays, and for 3 hours on [x]’s birthday in the event [x] is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders. on father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00pm if a non-school day) until 4.00pm sunday. for the purpose of order 14, changeover is to occur as follows: on non-school days, the mother is to deliver [x] to a member of the paternal family, including the paternal grandparent/s or paternal aunt or uncle at the [city c] library at the commencement of time and collecting the child from the grandparents at the [city c] library at the conclusion of time. on school days the father (along with a paternal family member) are to collect [x] from school on friday afternoon and at the conclusion of the father’s time with [x], are to return [x] to the mother at the [city c] library. the father’s time in order 14 is conditional upon the following: the father’s compliance with orders 22, 23 and 24, and that contact between the father and child in orders 14 (a) – (b) being supervised at all times by either the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt [ms d] or the paternal uncle [mr e], and the contact between the father and child in orders 14 (c) – (d) occurring in the presence/substantial attendance of either the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt [ms d] or the paternal uncle [mr e], and all overnight periods in orders 14 (c) – (d) occurring at the home of the paternal grandparents, paternal aunt [ms d] or the paternal uncle [mr e], and that the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt and paternal uncle sign an undertaking prepared by the independent children’s lawyer and file it with the court prior to time in order 14 occurring. child psychologist within 7 days of the date of these orders, the mother is to engage [ms g], a psychologist at [f counsellors city b] (or an alternative suitably qualified therapist nominated by the independent children’s lawyer if [ms g] is not available) who will provide psychological support and counselling for [x]. for the purpose of order 16, the mother must: complete all required documentation including the intake form, and complete the intake process, and comply with all reasonable directions and recommendations made by [f counsellors] with respect to the child’s engagement with and attendance upon [f counsellors], and do all things necessary to obtain a mental health care plan for [x] to minimise the costs of attendance at individual counselling, in the event that there is a shortfall in the costs of counselling, both parties are to be responsible for those costs, provide confirmation to the father via email, or via his solicitor, that she has complied with orders 16 and 17. within 7 days of the mother confirming that she has engaged [ms g] (or another suitably qualified therapist nominated by the independent children’s lawyer if [ms g] is not available) pursuant to order 13, the father is to contact [f counsellors] and provide the psychologist with his contact details and is to: comply with all recommendations and directions made by [x]’s therapist with respect to contact between the child and father. within 7 days of the mother confirming that she has engaged [ms g] (or another suitably qualified therapist nominated by the independent children’s lawyer if [ms g] is not available), the independent children’s lawyer will provide to the psychologist a copy of the following documents: these orders, the expert report dated 22 september 2020. the family report dated 14 february 2022. the assessment of [ms marella] completed by [ms k] dated 11 april 2022. supports for the mother within 7 days of the date of these orders, the mother is to attend upon her general practitioner and provide them with a copy of the assessment completed by [ms k] dated 11 april 2022 and is to obtain a referral and mental health plan for attendance upon a clinical or forensic psychologist, such therapist to be nominated by the independent children’s lawyer. for the purpose of order 20, the mother must make an appointment with her clinical/forensic psychologist and provide the details of her psychologist to the father via email or via his solicitor, and comply with the recommendations as to ongoing attendance and treatment made by the clinical/forensic psychologist, and provide a copy of the following documents to the psychologist: these orders, the expert report dated 22 september 2020, the family report dated 14 february 2022. the assessments of [ms marella] completed by [ms k] dated 11 april 2022. supports for the father the father must continue to attend upon his general practitioner, psychiatrist, psychologist and any other associated health care provider as recommended by his general practitioner, psychiatrist and psychologist. the father must, within 14 days of the date of these orders, provide a copy of these orders to his general practitioner, psychiatrist and psychologist and is to provide confirmation of having done so to the mother via email or via her solicitor. the father irrevocably authorises and directs, and this order acts as such authority and direction to his general practitioner, psychiatrist and psychologist to contact the mother (by email at ...) or her solicitor and inform them in the event that: the father has failed to comply with the recommendations of treatment, or the father has failed to comply with recommendations as to his attendance upon the treating practitioner. authorities for child’s psychologist and contact centre these orders act as an irrevocable authority for the child’s psychologist to discuss each of the parties’ and the child’s progress and attendance upon them with the [city b contact service]. miscellaneous that each party shall contact the other as soon as practicable, in the event of any medical or other emergency relating to [x]. default provisions/ change of residence in the event that the mother does not comply with facilitating time between the child and the father in accordance with orders 10 to 14 above, for 3 consecutive occasions, or on 4 occasions in any 3 month period, without providing to the father or the contact centre (whichever is relevant under the operative order) a medical certificate on or before the commencement of time (“the third default”) indicating that the child is unwell and unfit to attend the time, the following orders 28 to 52 are to apply from the commencement of the next day immediately following the third default of the orders (“the commencement date”): procedural that orders 1 to 27 in relation to the child, [x] born [in] 2015 (“[x]”) are discharged. parental responsibility that the father, [mr marella], have sole parental responsibility for [x]. that on each occasion a decision in respect to the long term welfare of [x] arises, the father shall: advise the mother in writing of the issue and his proposed decision, invite the mother to express her view or any alternate proposal she may have within a nominated time, give genuine consideration to timely views of the mother, advise the mother in writing of the decision taken. live with/spend time with (change of residence) that [x] shall live with the father. that within 24 hours of the commencement date, the mother shall advise the father via her solicitors of a time, which shall be no more than 48 hours after the making of these orders, that she will deliver [x] to the father, at the [city c] library and ensure that [x] is delivered to the father in accordance with this order. that from the commencement date, for a period of 3 months, [x] shall spend time and communicate with the mother as follows: every second weekend for a period of 3 hours, at the [m contact service], city b (“ city b contact service”) and for the purposes of this order, the parties will forthwith do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to complete any intake procedure required by the contact service, the parties will pay the fees of the contact centre equally, time will take place as can be facilitated by the contact centre but not less than one occasion per fortnight. that at the conclusion of order 33 above, provided that the mother has complied with orders 44, 45 and 48 below, [x] shall spend time and communicate with the mother on the following basis,- each alternate weekend, commencing in week 1, from 9.00 am saturday to 5.00 pm sunday. changeover to take place [city c] library, that the parents shall each ensure that any items required to travel with [x], including but not limited to, [x]’s heart reporting machine, any other necessary medical equipment and any medications [x] may be prescribed or taking, are to be included in their belongings brought with them at changeover. the parties shall be responsible for communicating between each other in relation to [x]’s medication via text message. nsw school term holidays that at the conclusion of order 33 above, for the nsw school term holidays [x] shall spend time with the mother and father as follows: for the first half with the mother in even numbered years, and for the second half with the father in even numbered years, and for the first half with the father in odd numbered years, and for the second half with the mother in odd numbered years. christmas day and christmas school holidays that at the conclusion of order 33 above, for christmas day, [x] will spend time with the mother and the father as follows: from 5.00pm on 24 december until 9.00am on 26 december with the father in even numbered years, from 9.00am on 26 december until 5.00pm on 27 december with the mother in even numbered years, from 5.00pm on 24 december until 9.00am on 26 december with the mother in odd numbered years, and from 9.00am on 26 december until 5.00pm on 27 december with the father in odd numbered years. christmas school holidays for the christmas school holidays [x] will spend time with the mother and the father as follows: for the first half with the father in even numbered years, and for the second half with the mother in even numbered years, and for the first half with the mother in odd numbered years, and for the second half with the father in odd numbered years. special days that at the conclusion of order 33 above, for [x]’s birthday, he shall spend time with the parent with who he is not already spending time with, from 3.30pm until 6.30pm if his birthday falls on a weekday, and if his birthday falls on a weekend or a public holiday, then he shall spend time with the parent with who he is not already spending time from 12.00noon until 6.00pm. that at the conclusion of order 33 above, [x] shall spend time with the father on father’s day from 9.00am until 5.00pm if not already spending time with the father. that at the conclusion of order 33 above, [x] shall spend time with the mother on mother’s day from 9.00am until 5.00pm if not already spending time with the mother. recovery that in the event [x] is not delivered to the father’s care in accordance with order 32 above, the father shall be at liberty to seek recovery orders, or such other order effecting the change of [x] into his care as he may see fit. in the event that [x] is withheld by the mother upon or after the making of these orders, or if [x] returns to the mother’s residence without prior written agreement consent from the father, then the father shall be at liberty to seek a recovery order, or such other order effecting the change of [x] into his care as he may see fit. counselling that within 14 days of the commencement date, the mother is to attend upon her general practitioner to obtain a referral for general psychological counselling and for the purpose of this order the mother must: make an appointment with her counsellor/psychologist forthwith and provide the details of her psychologist/ counsellor to the father, and comply with the recommendations as to ongoing attendance and treatment made by the counsellor/psychologist, and provide a copy of the following documents to the counsellor/psychologist: these orders, affidavit of [mr marella] sworn 13 april 2022, affidavit of [ms marella] sworn 13 april 2022, report of [ms k] dated 9 april 2022, section 62g report of [ms n] dated 14 february 2022, and expert report of [dr h] dated 22 september 2020. that within 14 days of the commencement date, the mother shall enrol in and subsequently complete a parenting after separation course and provide a certificate of completion to the father. that within 14 days of the commencement date, the father is to engage a psychologist at [f counsellors city b] to provide psychological support and counselling for [x]. that for the purpose of order 46, the father must, complete all required documentation including the intake form, complete the intake process, comply with all reasonable directions and recommendations made by [f counsellors] with respect to [x]’s engagement with and attendance upon [f counsellors], do all things necessary to obtain a mental health care plan for [x] to minimise the costs of attendance at individual counselling, in the event that there is a shortfall in the costs of counselling, the parties are to be jointly responsible for those costs, provide the psychologist with a copy of the following documents: these orders, affidavit of [mr marella] sworn 13 april 2022, affidavit of [ms marella] sworn 13 april 2022, report of [ms k] dated 9 april 2022, section 62g report of [ms n] dated 14 february 2022, expert report of [dr h] dated 22 september 2020, provide confirmation to the mother that he has complied with orders 46 and 47. that within 7 days of the father confirming that he has engaged a psychologist pursuant to order 46, the mother is to contact [f counsellors] and provide the psychologist with her contact details and is to comply with all recommendations and directions made by [x]’s psychologist with respect to contact between [x] and mother. that the father shall continue to attend upon his general practitioner, psychiatrist, psychologist and any other associated health care provider as recommended by his general practitioner, psychiatrist and psychologist. that the parents shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to enrol [x] in speech therapy and in relation to this, both parties will pay the costs of speech therapy equally. that within 28 days of the commencement date, the father shall do all acts and things to facilitate a meeting with [x]’s school counselling service for the purposes of engaging [x] in counselling provided by the school. that these orders act as an irrevocable authority for [x]’s psychologist to discuss with each of the parties’ and [x]’s progress and attendance upon them with the [city b contact service]. general orders to apply regardless of which parent [x] lives with that both parents are restrained from changing [x]’s residence to outside a 30km radius from [city c] nsw, without prior written consent of the other parent or a court order. that within 48 hours of such a change occurring, the parents shall advise each other of any change of particulars of their residential address, landline, telephone number, mobile telephone number and email address. that the parents are permitted to attend any school event or occasion, at [x]’s school, which parents are invited to. that the parents shall authorise in writing the principal or alike at the school attended by [x] to supply both parents with copies of school reports, progress reports, notices relating to pupils attending the school, school letters, invitations to and carnivals, sporting or social functions, notices of and any invitations to parent teacher interviews and any other notices directed to the parents of a child attending such school and service of sealed copy of these orders will be sufficient to discharge this order. the parents shall advise each other as soon as possible by the best available means in the event of the following occurring: [x] being injured or falling seriously ill, [x] requiring urgent medical treatment by a doctor or ambulance crew, [x]’s pacemaker and heart appointments, or [x] being admitted to hospital. that the parents are permitted to attend any special medical appointments for [x] and the parents shall advise each other of any such appointments not less than three days prior to any such appointment. that the parents are at liberty to obtain all medical records and to consult with [x]’s medical and dental practitioners, to obtain any information that they may require and that the purpose of this order, service of a sealed copy of these orders upon such medical or dental practitioners is sufficient authority. the parents shall not denigrate each other or the other parent’s family in the presence of [x] nor allow another person to do so. that the mother shall provide to the father all of [x]’s school uniforms and school supplies on the same day [x] begins living with the father either by way of courier or removalist service. that during the time [x] is with the parents, both parents shall: respect the privacy of the other parent and not question [x] about the personal life of the other parent, speak to the other parent respectfully, not denigrate or insult the other parent in the presence and hearing of [x] and use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of [x]. that within 14 days of the commencement date, the mother shall surrender [x]’s australian passport to the father on the same day [x] begins living with the father, following which the father shall retain [x]’s passport at all times for safe-keeping. dated: 4 may 2022
orders sought by the respondent mother
parental responsibility: - that the mother shall have sole parental responsibility for the child [x] born [in] 2015 hereinafter referred to as (“the child”). live with: - that the child shall live with the mother. spend time with: - that the child shall spend no time with the father. miscellaneous:- that pursuant to s 68b of the family law act 1975 (cth) that the father shall be and is hereby restrained, by way of injunction, from attending upon the children’s home and/or school. that the mother is permitted to take the child [x] born [in] 2015 to place outside australia in accordance with s65y of the family law act 1975 (cth). that the child [x] born [in] 2015 is permitted to travel internationally as provided for in s 65y of the family law act 1975 (cth) and s 11(1)(b) of the australian passports act 2005 (cth) and for this purpose the mother is permitted to apply for the issue of an australian passport for the child. that the mother is permitted to take the child without the necessity for consent by the father. that the mother and father henceforth exclusively use the name [x] [bracewell] as the name for the child and forthwith do all things necessary, individually and jointly including making application and executing documents, to seek the alternation of the registration of the name of the child in the register of births in the state of new south wales from the name “[x] [marella]” to the name ‘[x] [bracewell]”.
orders sought by the independent children’s lawyer
parental responsibility that the mother, [ms marella], have sole parental responsibility for the child [x] born [in] 2015 (“[x]”), save for the issue of passports as provided for in order 24 herein. the mother shall keep the father advised of the names of all medical practitioners and treating allied health practitioners that [x] attends upon and is to advise the father by email of any change within 24 hours of such change occurring. both parties are to keep the other advised of a telephone number and email address that they can be contacted on and are to advise the other of any change, by email within 24 hours of such change occurring. for the purpose of all communication about [x], this is to occur via email save for circumstances of urgency at which time they may contact each other via telephone or text message. that both parties by this order, authorise any school that [x] attends to provide to the other party copies of all information concerning [x], including but not limited to school reports examples of school work, school newsletters, notification of all school activities, parent/teacher nights. the father is permitted to contact any treating medical practitioner [x] attends upon and may receive any and all information pertaining to [x]. the mother is restrained by injunction from changing [x]’s surname and the mother shall ensure that [x] is to be referred to by the name ‘[x] [marella]’. lives with that [x] shall live with the mother, conditional upon the following: within 7 days of the date of these orders, the mother is to attend upon her general practitioner and provide them with a copy of the assessment completed by [ms k] dated 11 april 2022 and is to obtain a referral and mental health plan for attendance upon a registered psychologist (“psychologist”), such therapist to be nominated by her general practitioner. for the purpose of order 9, the mother must make an appointment with her psychologist and provide the details of her psychologist to the father via email or via his solicitor, and comply with the recommendations as to ongoing attendance and treatment made by the psychologist, and provide a copy of the following documents to the psychologist: these orders, the expert report dated 22 september 2020. the family report dated 14 february 2022. the assessment of [ms marella] completed by [ms k] dated 11 april 2022. spend time with arrangements for a period of 3 months, the father is permitted to provide cards, gifts and letters to the child and to speak with the child via facetime or telephone, with such communication to occur with the child during therapy sessions. for the purpose of order 10, the therapist is permitted to read any cards or written material before they are passed onto the child, and for the purpose of order 10, the therapist may use their discretion to decline to pass on any cards or gifts if the therapist forms the view that the child is not yet ready to receive these items or if they are inappropriate and will advise the father and provide feedback about this decision. for the purpose of order 10 the father’s time with the child is conditional upon the father’s compliance with orders 20, 21 and 22. upon conclusion of the 3 month period set out in orders 10, the father will be permitted to spend time with the child at the [city b contact service] on a fortnightly basis on dates and times as can be facilitated by the [city b contact service], for a period of three months. 13. for the purpose of order 12: the father’s time with the child is conditional is upon the father’s compliance with orders 20, 21 and 22. both parties must do all things necessary to complete the intake and assessment process required by the [city b contact service] and are to follow all reasonable directions of the [city b contact service]. following the 3 month period of contact occurring at the [city b contact service] the father will be permitted to spend time with the child as follows: for a period of 2 months, on each alternate saturday and sunday from 10.00am until 1.00pm on each day, and following the 2 month period specified in order 14 (a), for a period of 2 months, on each alternate saturday and sunday from 10.00am until 4.00pm on each day, and following the 2 month period specified in order 14 (b), for a period of 2 months on each alternate weekend from 10.00am saturday until 4.00pm sunday following the 2 month period specified in order 14 (c), thereafter [x] will spend time with the father as follows: each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday, or 4.00pm on a non-school day, until 4.00pm sunday, with these weekend periods to commence on the first friday of each school term, in even numbered years, [x] will spend the first half of all term and summer school holidays with the father with such time to commence at the conclusion of school on the last day of term and conclude at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays, and in odd numbered years, [x] will spend the second half of all term and summer school holidays with the father with such time to commence at 4.00pm on the middle saturday of the holidays and conclude at 4.00pm on the last sunday of the school holidays, and for 3 hours on [x]’s birthday in the event x is not in the father’s care pursuant to these orders. on father’s day weekend from the conclusion of school on friday (or 4.00pm if a non-school day) until 4.00pm sunday. for the purpose of these order 14, changeover is to occur as follows: on non-school days, the mother is to deliver [x] to a member of the paternal family, including the paternal grandparent/s or paternal aunt or uncle at the [city c] library at the commencement of time and collecting the child from the grandparents at the [city c] library at the conclusion of time. on school days the father (along with a paternal family member) are to collect [x] from school on friday afternoon and at the conclusion of the father’s time with [x], are to return [x] to the mother at the [city c] library. 15. the father’s time in order 14 is conditional upon the following: the father’s compliance with orders 20, 21 and 22, and that contact between the father and child in orders 14 (a) – (b) shall be supervised at all times by either the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt [ms d] or the paternal uncle [mr e], and the contact between the father and child in orders 14 (c) – (d) shall occur in the presence/substantial attendance of either the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt [ms d] or the paternal uncle [mr e], and all overnight periods in orders 14 (c) – (d) shall occur at the home of the paternal grandparents, paternal aunt [ms d] or the paternal uncle [mr e] save for periods of overseas travel as provided for in order 26 herein, and that the paternal grandmother, paternal grandfather, paternal aunt and paternal uncle sign an undertaking prepared by the independent children’s lawyer and file it with the court prior to time in order 14 occurring. supports for [x]/reintroduction within 7 days of the date of these orders, the mother is to engage [x] with [f counsellors city c] (or an alternative suitably qualified therapist nominated by the independent childrens lawyer) who will provide support and counselling for [x]. 17. for the purpose of order 16, the mother must: complete all required documentation including the intake form, and complete the intake process, and comply with all reasonable directions and recommendations made by [f counsellors] with respect to the child’s engagement with and attendance upon [f counsellors], and do all things necessary to obtain a mental health care plan for [x] to minimise the costs of attendance at individual counselling, in the event that there is a shortfall in the costs of counselling, the father is to be responsible for those costs, provide confirmation to the father via email, or via his solicitor, that she has complied with orders 16 and 17. within 7 days of the mother confirming that she has engaged [f counsellors city c] (or another suitably qualified therapist nominated by the independent children’s lawyer) pursuant to order 16, the father is to contact [f counsellors] and provide the service with his contact details and is to: comply with all recommendations and directions made by [x]’s therapist with respect to contact between the child and father. within 7 days of the mother confirming that she has engaged [x] with [f counsellors city c] (or another suitably qualified therapist nominated by the independent children’s lawyer), the independent children’s lawyer will provide to the service a copy of the following documents: these orders, the expert report dated 22 september 2020. the family report dated 14 february 2022. the assessment of [ms marella] completed by [ms k] dated 11 april 2022. supports for the father the father must continue to attend upon his general practitioner, psychiatrist, psychologist and any other associated health care provider as recommended by his general practitioner, psychiatrist and psychologist. within 14 days of the date of these orders, the father is to provide a copy of these orders to his general practitioner, psychiatrist and psychologist and is to provide confirmation of having done so to the mother via email or via her solicitor. the father irrevocably authorises and directs, and this order acts as such authority and direction to his general practitioner, psychiatrist and psychologist to contact the mother (by email at ...) or her solicitor and inform them in the event that: the father has failed to comply with the recommendations of treatment, or the father has failed to comply with recommendations as to his attendance upon the treating practitioner. authorities for child’s therapist and contact centre these orders act as an irrevocable authority for the child’s psychologist to discuss each of the parties’ and the child’s progress and attendance upon them with the [city b contact service]. passport and overseas travel each parent shall, within 14 days of any request by the other parent give all consents, sign all documents and do all things necessary to enable the requesting parent (“requesting parent”) to obtain a passport for the child [x] born [in] 2015. failing the parent who is being requested to do all things necessary for the passport to issue complying with order 24, the requesting parent shall be at liberty and is hereby authorised to obtain a passport for [x] absent the other parent’s consent. commencing in december 2023 both parties are permitted to travel with the child outside of the commonwealth of australia to countries that are signatories to the hague convention, provided that they shall provide the other parent with the following information: twenty-one (21) days’ notice of such intended travel, an itinerary for such intended travel, contact telephone numbers and address for all places at which [x] will stay during such travel, and copies of all travel tickets or bookings and in particular a copy of the return travel ticket. the parent with possession of [x]’s passport must provide the passport to the travelling parent upon request and in preparation for travel, conditional upon the provision of information required by order 26 having been met by the travelling parent. overseas travel shall take place during the travelling parent’s time pursuant to these orders unless otherwise agreed. in the event that compensatory time is required, such time must take place within 4 weeks of [x]’s return to australia. miscellaneous that the mother and father share equally the costs of [dr h]’s attendance for cross-examination at final hearing, noting that the parties are legally aided and that legal aid act have approved funding for this purpose. that each party shall contact the other as soon as practicable, in the event of any medical or other emergency relating to [x]. the independent children’s lawyer be granted liberty to relist the matter on short notice. notation the icl seeks that this matter be adjourned for a period of 6 months, on a part heard basis, to monitor the mother’s compliance with orders allowing for the reintroduction of time between [x] and his father.
applicant father’s evidence
the post-traumatic stress disorder and depression are reactive to experiences of personal and family threats through his work and his sense of loss of safety. he may have had a milder episode in 2012.
- - - with trying your best is, sir, you’re not really answering the question. the reality is you accept, don’t you, that some of your behaviour at its worst when you were severely mentally unwell could have been very frightening for [x]?---it’s –it’s possible. right. and do you accept that it was equally frightening to my client?---possibly, yes.
ms haughton: but, as you say, you went there with the intention of removing [x]?---to spend time with him. so, yes, you went there with the intention of removing [x]?---yes. yes. and you know that my client would not consent to that occurring?---i did not know that she would not – i did not know that she would say no. that’s why i handed him back after. no. you handed him back because the police told you you had to hand him back. that’s why you handed him back, isn’t it?---yes, as well, yes, yes, yes. yes. not because you – not because she said, “please hand him back”. it took the police to make you do it, did not it? that’s the case, isn’t it?---yes. and if you had had your way you would have grabbed him and left the house with him and taken him to your parents’ house. that’s what you would have done if you could have got away with it?---no.
right. right. so – but here’s an incident where you don’t remember something happening. do you accept that’s your evidence?---yes. and you were in such a state, overwhelmed emotionally – is that an explanation, do you think, for why you can’t remember what happened on 10 september?---yes. so we have a situation where you’ve turned up with the intention of removing [x] on 8 november, so not very long after he has had open heart surgery and a pacemaker inserted. do you accept that?---yes. and not long after the mother says she found you stabbing the blinds with a knife?---well - - - the 10th – that’s 10 september, so - - -?---10 september. what was the date, again, of [x]’s surgery? 20 september for the first one and 25 september for the second one?---and the stabbing of the blinds? on 10 september?---so that was before. before, yes?---okay. so what was your question again? right. so do you accept that my client shortly before you turned up on 8 november - - -?---yes. - - - there had been an incident that my client – that alarmed my client about your behaviour?---yes. and in addition to that she says that you had told her that you punched past her face while you were staying at [location u]?---no. no. and we have the issue in relation to his surgery. so you would have expected, would not you, that if you had turned up on 8 november that my client would not have consented to you removing x. you accept that, don’t you?---possibly. yes. and that’s – at no time and in your material you don’t say that “i had asked her if i could do that”?---i asked her when i picked him up. right?---yes.
you say in your affidavit that [x] saw you and ran up to you and that you picked him up in his arms and asked him words to the effect, “do you want to go and see nonna and nanna?” and [x] said, “yes”?---yes. so you’ve asked this little boy if he wanted to go and see them. and do you say that’s when you decided to take him to your parents, or was that your plan all along?---i definitely – yes, i – that was my plan to spend time with him at the grandparents’ house. yes?---yes. and you would agree, sir, that when you made – the only arrangement you made with my client was to go to her parents’ home to see [x]?---when i – when he ran into my arms, she said, “what are you doing?” i said, “i’m going to take him to see the grandparents and spent time with them.” the answer is – to my question is – yes?---yes. at no time prior to that did you tell her that you were coming to pick him up?---no. and you then say in paragraph 65 that:   marella] approached me when i was holding [x] and when she was close enough she proceeded to lunge at me, reaching for [x], in what i interpreted to be an attempt to snatch him out of my arms. i became immediately fearful as i did not understand [ms marella’s] explosive reaction.
is that what you say?---yes. ... all right. and do you accept that her reaction was reasonable in the circumstances that it hadn’t been discussed with her prior to that?---it wasn’t discussed prior to that. and [x] was still recovering from major open heart surgery?---yes. and you’re already booked into a mental health facility as an inpatient?---yes. so you accept that she would realise that you were suffering a significant mental health crisis at the time?---possibly. if she thought of it that way. i don’t know. and you say in your affidavit that around this time, the police arrived and may you give him back to - - -?---yes. okay?---yes. were you – at that time – by the police arrived you were, in fact, already moving towards your car, weren’t you?---no. i was still at the house. all right?---yes. just accept for the moment so that the cops’ report for – which is page 50 of the icls tender bundle says that on that day, it says the police attended after you – the defendant – reported concerns for the welfare of [x]. it’s not the way it’s typed?---yes. yes. it says effectively that:
upon arriving at the location the police observed the defendant holding his son and walking backwards on the driveway of the premises towards his vehicle.
do you accept that was true? that’s what the police found when they got there?---no. no, that’s not true. they got that wrong?---i was moving backwards so [ms marella] would not hurt [x] with his chest. and that the – my client appeared distraught and was following you and attempting to get the child back?---yes. do you accept that’s what was happening?---yes. yes. yes. and i want to suggest that the police record accords with my client’s version that you’re moving towards your car, taking [x] and she’s pleading and begging for you not to do it. do you accept that’s the case?---no. that’s not the case.
yes. like, not, like, you know, there’s times gone – like, i’ve been – i’ve been trying my best to – to make the mother as comfortable as possible and having a supervised contact, and i just don’t know what else to do. i’m trying – you know, i’m trying my best for everyone to be civil. i just wish we could all do this for [x], to – for his sake.
all right. and you still – and i take it you say to the court you still consider you qualify for the disability pension?---i’m still on it. yes. well, and that’s because you can’t even hold down a job for 15 hours a week, can you?---i haven’t – at this stage – because i’ve been stripped of a lot of my qualifications because of the avo. i haven’t decided what i want to do at this stage. right. but i mean, you know, would you tell his honour that you’re not even really well enough to say, go and stack shelves in [a supermarket]?---as part – as part of my therapy i’m actually looking for volunteer work to help me get into that back of – to get back into the workforce again. all right. but you would agree that as of today you’re not well enough or unable to cope with any form of employment. is that a fair assessment of your position as of today?---at the moment, that’s correct. yes. yes. and when you were interviewed for the family report, you told the report writer that you had changed your position and you were no longer seeking - - -
and yet – so later you’re going off to see [ms y] and you say, “look, i’ve changed my position. i now think – i am now not pressing my application that [x] come and live with me.” that’s what you told her, wasn’t it?---at the time. yes. so what happened between you talking to [ms y] and saying you, effectively, that it was not in [x]’s best interests to change residence. what happened between that and your case outline being filed?---after reading [ms y]’s report the mother still did not want me to have any time with – with [x] and i still – [x] still deserves to have time with both of his parents. so upon reflection i changed it as i believed that would be in [x]’s best interests to have a relationship with both parents. during the time that you were together as a family, i want to suggest that you did not play the role of [x]’s caregiver, as you assert. and, in fact, it was my client that did most of the work, do you accept that?---no. that’s not – that’s not right. and in paragraph 25 of her affidavit she talks about – that you, in fact, appeared to be disinterested during the relationship. do you accept that’s so?---no. all right. and that she says that – paragraph 35 – that after [x] was discharged from the [city c] hospital, it was her that was doing the majority of caring for [x]. do you accept that’s so?---discharged from [city c] hospital? because he went to canberra, did not he, and he was in [z] hospital for two weeks, then he was discharged to [city c]?---you’ve – okay. yes. yes. and then he went – she went to live with her parents for a month. so when she came home after that – what’s that, nearly two months later – she says that you provided very little assistance with her care of [x]? what do you say about that?---when [x] got out of the hospital, we were together at home. but she says you did not do the primary care of him. she did - - -?---i helped. all right. she says there were times when she was doing things and she would put [x] on the lounge with you and ask you to read him a book and she says you did not even do that?---no. i used to read him books. do you remember the incident that she refers to in paragraph 38 of her affidavit where she became alarmed because you had left [x] alone in the bath?---no. that’s not correct. right. do you agree there was an occasion when you left [x] alone in the bath and came downstairs?---no. i want to suggest that was the case?---no. that’s not the case.
...how dependent, if at all, are you likely to be upon the support and assistance of your parents in the care of [x]?---i would, of course, try and handle everything myself, but my parents – if i need anything or assistance on – i’m more than willing to ask them to help me if i need anything. but i feel at this time – at this stage of my life that i’m more than capable to – to care for [x] and provide any needs that he – that’s needed for him. does it follow from that that in your view that you, in fact, would not need and would not rely upon your parents to care for [x], because you can care for him and provide for him?---i – i feel i could do that. yes. right?---yes. thank you. ms haughton: so what i suggest is if you can’t cope with holding down a job, you’re not going to be able to cope with the stresses of having a small child in your care, are you?---i’ve been off work because i was sick, but as i said, i’m looking to getting to volunteer work to get into the force again. yes.
well, telling somebody that you would like to go back to work - - -?---yes. - - - is all very fine. you might have grand plans and hope that’s going to happen, but the reality is, up until now you’re not going to be able to cope with going to work and that’s why you’re on a disability pension. that’s true, isn’t it?---no. well, it’s not because you’ve had a broken leg, and can’t get to work, is it? it’s because you have a mental health issue that prevents you being able to cope with the day-to-day requirements of having a job. do you accept that?---no. and having a child in your care could be very stressful, and there’s no certainty that you’re going to be able to cope with that, is there?---no. i believe i can cope with that. and i think that somewhere it says that you would not consider moving back to live with your parents unless you got, i think, four nights a fortnight with [x], is that correct?---i’m willing to move whenever is needed to spend time with my son. you see the problem is, sir, saying, “i’m willing to move when i’m needed” - - -?---yes. - - - we’ve got no idea really what’s going to be the situation when you have [x] in your care. you may have him in canberra. you may have him in [city c]. you may have him at your parents. we simply don’t know what’s going to be the situation, do we?---he – he has a room at my parents’ house. he would be there, with me. so are you going to consent to an order that he – that when he’s with you he has to be at your parents’ home. is that something that you consent to?---i would consent to that. dr leslie: i have nothing of the sort. the witness: it’s closer for him. he has got his family and friends there. so yes. ms haughton: and would you also live in your parents’ house?---yes. i also have a room there as well. even if you just have him for a day?---yes. yes.
his honour: would there be though perhaps some longer term plan that after living at your parents’ place that you would presumably seek to get your own?---yes. yes. upon the sale of the other home i will try and save up to have something for myself. yes. but that’s perhaps likely to be somewhat longer term because as you’ve indicated – and none of this is a criticism, of course?---yes. yes. but you’re not working at the moment?---yes. we don’t know when that might occur?---yes. and, therefore, all those financial things that flow from that?---yes. understand?---yes, i understand. thank you?---yes.
so the reality is, him spending time in your parents’ home with you just means it’s going to be more strangers he has to deal with. do you accept that?---quite possibly. yes. right. but your proposal was that you would have a conversation with him and tell him his mother loves him very much. it’s none of his fault and he’s going to live with you for a little while. that’s what you tell the court you would have said to your son had he got – been required to go and live with you?---yes. and there’s also – i’ve also learned things from the – the parenting courses that i’ve done.
well, it would be like his mother dying in a lot of ways, would not it?---quite possibly. suddenly – suddenly, the anchor in his life is ripped out from him and he’s put in a house full of strangers. can you imagine how traumatised he would have been?---yes. but that was your plan, wasn’t it?---my plan was to have time with him at a supervised contact centre. it did not have to come to this, but, unfortunately, it is going to be traumatising if it does go down that path.
now, your lawyer handed up – your counsel handed up a document this morning outlining the orders you’re seeking, now, i appreciate it’s a legal document. it’s a bit hard to understand. but one of the orders talks about the mother not complying and [x] – he coming to live with you. do you know what i’m talking about? it’s paragraph 27 of your – the proposal in it?---yes. what’s your – i just want to ask you – what’s your understanding of that?---so by me – like, obviously, i’m trying to seek a – a slow reintroduction - - - yes?--- - - - for my child – build up the relationship. if all that fails then my understanding is then he will then be transferred into my care which, i understand, is going to be very traumatic. but i don’t want it to get that far. i – you know, i just don’t know what else to do for the child. every child should have both parents in their lives.
evidence of the paternal grandparents
report of dr o
opinion and recommendation [mr marella] with no previous history of psychiatric illnesses prior to working at the [employer t], has suffered from major depression and ptsd, as a result of work-related traumatic experiences, compounded by his perceived lack of support from his employer. he has been separated from his wife who appeared unable to deal with his deteriorating mental state. an ongoing conflict among family members and a denial of access to his four-year-old son have further compounded his problems and aggravated his depressive feelings. it is my opinion that [mr marella] has progressed well with the abovementioned treatment regime, including pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy, and achieved a remission from his major depression. he has also become able to cope with his chronic ptsd symptoms and his current mental state is assessed to have remained stable. he has shown a good insight into his problems and his judgment is assessed to be fair. it has also been my opinion that [mr marella] has shown a good and healthy attachment to his son and he would not in any way present a danger to him if he were to be granted access to his son. [mr marella] reported to me that he used to regularly care for his son and even identified a health issue his son had raised with him in relation to his current heart condition on 30 october 2018. [mr marella] stated that he immediately drove him to an emergency department for treatment and then notified his mother of the situation. [mr marella] is currently worried about his son’s wellbeing. i believe that [mr marella]’s mental state will further improve and the attachment between the father and son will be strengthened if he were allowed access to his son. i understand that his grandparents have had an extremely close relationship with their grandson and would be happy for [mr marella] to have access to his son in their home. regarding the causal factors for [mr marella]’s condition of major depression and ptsd, it is my opinion that his work experiences at [employer t] have mainly contributed to the onset and maintenance of his illnesses. i do not believe that [mr marella]’s tpd (total and permanent disability) will have an adverse impact on his capacity to parent and care for his child [x]. he is currently being maintained on the least effective doses of medication for his condition, which will not in any way interfere with his ability to care for his son. as his mental state has significantly improved with treatment, [mr marella] has not experienced anymore suicidal ideation. he has reported improvement in his capacity to enjoy life. in fact, both [mr marella] and his child [x] will greatly benefit from a meaningful relationship between them if [mr marella] were given access to his son. if [mr marella] were allowed to see his son, his chances of making a full recovery from his depressive illness will be greatly enhanced. i believe that [mr marella] is fit to care for his son and deserves to have access to him, as determined by the court.   the father “has been adherent to his clinical treatment regime, including pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy provided by a clinical psychologist, (b) his prescribed two mediations were recorded, and (c) “it is my opinion that mr marella’s depression is in remission and i have no concerns if he commences regular contact with his son.”   his prescribed two mediations were recorded, and (c) “it is my opinion that mr marella’s depression is in remission and i have no concerns if he commences regular contact with his son.”   “it is my opinion that mr marella’s depression is in remission and i have no concerns if he commences regular contact with his son.”   marella]’s diagnoses in accordance with dsm-v criteria are as follows:
- chronic ptsd [partially resolving] - major depression [in remission] - the effects of these conditions may adversely impact his mood and functional capacity. however, he has already achieved a full remission from his major depression, and his mental state has become stable for the last several months. his mental wellbeing will be further improved if he is allowed to have access to his son whom he has not seen since 2018. if a diagnosis is made, your opinion as to: whether the mental health condition of the father is short term, long term or chronic. his mental health condition of ptsd is chronic, but it has been well controlled by medication and psychotherapy, provided by me, and trauma-focussed cbt, provided his clinical psychologist. his major depressive disorder is episodic in nature and is currently in full-remission. the effect of the condition upon the father’s functioning. i believe that having achieved full remission of his major depression and as his trauma symptoms have been well-controlled by psychotherapy, he has now started to gradually restore his pre-injury functional level. the treatment plan to manage that condition. pharmacotherapy including antidepressant and mood stabilisers for another two years and to continue trauma focused therapy for another year. what support systems are likely to assist the father in treatment and management of the condition. psychological support by his parents and a network of friends may provide him emotional stability. financial support provided by his dsp will further improve his mental wellbeing. ongoing psychotherapy, including trauma focused cbt, will help stabilise his mental state. occupational rehabilitation will help enhance his self-esteem. what factors, if any, might impact upon the success of any course of treatment or action restoration of his low self-esteem and strengthening of his “sense of self” will play a significant role in his long-term recovery. the opportunity to be reunited with his son about whom he has always spoke passionately and with whom he has had a strong emotional attachment will certainly enhance his self-esteem and confidence and further improve his mental wellbeing. the reunion between the father and son, in the form of supervised meetings followed by less restricted meetings as the court orders, will certainly enhance the psychosocial development and mental wellbeing of the son. if a diagnosis is made, whether in your opinion that mental health condition results in the father being a risk of harm to himself and/or others?
it is my opinion that [mr marella] does not present any risk to himself and/or others. to the extent that you are able to comment, the extent to which [mr marella]’s mental health and general emotional wellbeing may have or may impact upon his parenting capacity. [mr marella] has achieved a full remission from his depression and his trauma symptoms have been well controlled. he has been fully adherent to his treatment regime and continues to be seriously focused on his psychosocial recovery. i believe he is fully capable of caring for his son and has a capacity to parent him, and can help enhance the physical, social and emotional development of the child, despite his mental health condition.
oral evidence of dr o
you’ve never seen the child, [x], have you?---no. i never had a chance to see him indirectly with his son because my role has been as the treating psychiatrist, and i look after his mental health but in the course of my treatment and assessment i always explored how he would, like, interact with his child and when he has been talking about this child ..... session and show a lot of empathy and seemed to have a strong sense of attachment to his son. these are the observations i’ve made, but i never had an opportunity to observe him interacting with his son. i mean, he was not even allowed to see him for the last four or five years.
...but he never admitted to it. he said that he did not – he did not say those things. but he admitted to the fact that he was from time to time – at the time – depressed and his mood was irritable. that sort of thing. but he was saying that he did not mean to say those things intentionally. to which i believe him.
... i see it as two different things altogether. i mean, people suffering from mental illness, for instance, they – they are not mutually exclusive. so depending on – on the mental state, people really able to function and when it comes to him, [mr marella], and he has been unwell. and he worked very hard to get his condition stabilised, and he has always been compliant, and attuned to the treatment regime, seeing a psychiatrist, psychologist, taking medication – so he achieved, in terms of his depression, what we call a full remission. so that – that’s a – the real success that he achieve out of the treatment. and – and looking after the child ..... i’m not saying that he would be fully capable of looking after the child independently at the present moment. we are talking about a person who try very hard to get his mental state stabilised. and i think he’s now fit enough to have access to the child. and if he has access to the child under supervision, or whatever the court orders, i think that will help him a lot – enhance his self-esteem and self-confidence and also help improve his mental state and mental wellbeing. and i thought that the child also deserve to be – to have access to his father. because they should have a good, healthy relationship. and so that would also help improve the child’s psychological development as well. so what i’m saying is that even though he has got a mental illness, it doesn’t necessarily exclude him – would exclude him from caring for the child. i think – as far as [mr marella] is concerned, he is very cooperative. he got good insight his problem. and he – he’s quite willing to accept whatever the court orders as long as he got some access to his – to his son. which i think he deserve. and also it would be good for the son’s wellbeing as well.
respondent mother’s evidence
and what about since?---well, i haven’t had any contact with them, no. but knowing them at the time for such a long time, i mean, you know, listening to it all the time, it was very much always having a battle with something, and tear and heartache and hurt, and looking back on it, you know, sort of getting off on that hurt and pain from things, which obviously, you know, i don’t understand. that’s not how i grew up. but it seems the way they’re geared, and it is excessive.
they don’t love [x]?---i don’t think so. because if they really loved for [x], they would know – they would be, you know, woken up by – he’s extremely ill. and actually when i, you know, rang in desperate need of help, that they would have accepted, you know, this – he is sick, and let’s help her. but instead, it was, “she’s – he’s not – he’s fine, [ms marella]. he’s fine”. you know, when i was so desperately needing help and safety, “he’s fine”. it was like they buried their head in the sand about it. so are you saying, even now, that from each of the family members of [marella] who’ve given evidence today, you say that it’s all just an act?---yes. i know that’s really big to say, but i’ve done a lot of talking about them and a lot of thinking about them, and a lot of things that – layers have come off of memories, and, you know, one of them being, you know, trying to host a birthday party for my husband, and for, you know, his mum not wanting to be there was just – why? why would not you be there? is a meeting so important to you? but it was more important to her to go to a meaningless meeting that she had told me that was meaningless, but to show face, to put on the front, you know, to be there. can i just bring you back to my question today?---yes, sure. present time?---mmm. you are saying that their evidence, both in their affidavits and in the witness box, that it’s all just show, it’s all just a front?---yes. because if they really did care for [x], i would expect, you know, at the bare minimal, you know, for them to send a card for his birthday or for easter or for christmas or any special occasion. not a card, not a present, nothing has ever been sent to [x] which could have spent – like you said, it’s such an expenditure to come here and do all of this, but, you know, maybe $50 to get a present and deliver it as one, seems nothing. but they still haven’t done it. because if they really meant that we meant anything to them, they would have done that instantly.
how could you possibly know what his current skills are?---because i spent a decade with him. a decade of hearing every moment in his brain and seeing all of his actions with my own eyes. feeling it. seeing it. right then and there. that’s more evidence than i will ever need.
yes. do you think that might have been because he was three years old then?---no. he was a really unsettled kid. and it – it was – it was like night and day. when we – we finally got ourselves into hiding, because we were obviously that petrified of her lies and we had police involved. when were in this – in hiding environment, he stopped vomiting. and it was like the biggest shock to me, and even more so evidence to me to say how much this boy has gone through, and i cannot believe i let it happen to my son when he has already gone through so much. and yes, obviously i regret not leaving any earlier. and like i’ve said so many times, i was never going to leave, because it’s just not in us to ever break marriages in our family. and i was never going to – i was never going to leave. and the only reason i did leave was because we were absolutely threatened to our lives, and it was to save [x]. and if i did not have [x] – i’ve said this before too – i probably would have went down with the ship, because [x] was the reason i had to get out and protect him. and in amongst all that, you know, getting out and protecting him, was – the thoughts was, i have to protect [x] and his mother. it wasn’t [ms marella]. it wasn’t me. it was and his mother. and so prominent how much we were in so much danger that that was my thoughts. but it was just, yes, like i said, it was just so – i have to do this, and i have to go now. we have to disappear. we’ve got to be gone. absolutely gone. this is way, way too dangerous for us. i did a evidence with police about it. i’ve had really good relationships with the police. good contact with them. and really, really good contact with [dr s], which was our treating doctor for all three of us. and he really helped me a lot through it. a lot.
and so you had remembered it by the time you saw [ms y], but you had forgotten it again by the time you filed your affidavit. is that right?---if that’s correct, yes. you never reported that to the police either, did you?---i can easily do that if you need me to. because it is the truth. yes. [ms marella], it’s just another thing you made up to tell [ms y], that you had not told the previous experts, isn’t it?---no. i’m not making it up. we would not be here if it wasn’t so extreme. we were pushed to the absolute edge of our lives. when you’re at the edge of your lives, you’ve got to leave. you’ve got to disappear. this is not enjoyable for me at all. we had to leave. it was our lives on the line. you accept, don’t you, that you made reports of incidents to [ms y] that you did not make to [dr h]?---things that i said to her that i did not - - -
and they’re all giving evidence of the support they’re offering to [mr marella] and willing to continue offering?---yes. which is very wrong. that support – supporting evidence – you know, them coming up to the witness box with his mum and dad – flat out lied to you. flat out lied to you. it’s a disappointment. especially for [ms ab]. she says that she’s part of [employer t]. she should be proud and have pride in herself to be up in front of, you know, court or – the court here as well, but being, you know, a public member, and then come out and – and flat out lie – was just disappointing. so it’s your position, is it, that they have no intention of supporting him? is that what you’re saying to his honour?---they’re supporting him financially. they love this. they love it. you don’t think that they provide any emotional support to their son?---no. no. no.
yes?---i did not know about it at all and my friend had sent me a message, said, “is everything okay? i have seen this.” so then i am here, talking to [mr marella] about it, asking, “what’s going on? what have you done? you know, you’ve got this big picture of [x] with this massive, cut open chest, looking sick as hell because he’s on medicine from his – this huge, major heart surgery, you know, plastered up, you know, without my permission at all. at all.” and then to write in there, you know, that i am vulnerable and this and that, you know, was exposing – you know, trying to tell the world, “we need help. we’re all falling apart, you know, except – and we needed money support”, except for, you know, all of his heart surgeries, we have stayed at the [location u], they have fed us there. absolutely brilliant show that they have there. you know, they support – they’re right close to the hospital. we did not need any money, we did not pay anything for any of the surgery and we’re just lucky enough to live in australia and have the absolute best experts to make the right decision and look after my boy as much as possible. very lucky. very lucky to live in australia and have all of this support. and after you had that argument, [mr marella] left the hotel for a while and - - -?---yes, he went - - - - - - then returned?--- - - - missing. yes?---he went missing. my dad went and looked for him. and - - -?---we were concerned for him. he went missing. he had done that a few times. he was upset on his return to the hotel - - -?---yes. - - - wasn’t he? yes. how long do you say that he left the hotel for, [ms bracewell]?---i don’t know. you don’t give any evidence in your affidavit or to any of the experts that he was violent or threatening on his return, just that he was crying, that’s - - -?---yes. - - - your evidence, isn’t it?---yes.
and he was, therefore, roughly two months – two and a bit months? yes. and his evidence – and i accept that you may not accept this, but his evidence is that that actually helped him enormously, do you accept that that’s his position, that having attended that facility was of great help to him?---good for him, yes. i won’t ever trust him. yes. you’ve read - - -?---and i won’t trust anyone’s report on him. his honour: why?---because i was living in it. no, i know you understand that, but - - -?---yes. -- - isn’t there a risk, though, if you just keep saying, “this is my frame of reference, that i lived in it” - - -?---yes. -- - that nothing can have changed from there?---well, even in, you know, doing this paperwork here, you know – talking and wanting to take [x] completely, this is another show of any thought for [x] – any thought for [x], you would not be doing that to him. but he said that his preferred course is for [x] to keep living with you and just spending time with him, do you accept that?---yes, he needs to stay with me, absolutely. but that’s what the father has said. that’s the ideal course?---yes, but i cannot trust – i cannot ever trust him, ever.
and, therefore, taking it to the logical conclusion, the risk is that i could end up making an order for [x] to go and live primarily with his dad and only spend supervised time with you?---yes. so you’re playing a really high stakes game of poker, aren’t you?---no, i’m not risking anything. that’s why we’re here. that’s why we’re here. i’m not risking any of it, because this - - - but you are - - -?--- - - - this is a vulnerable boy - - - but – sorry, but you are?---i’m not. i’m not going to risk a vulnerable boy - - - no - - -?--- - - - ever. - but if the evidence - - -?---no one would. if the evidence - - -?---you would not. no one would. if the evidence, though, from experts, says there is no relevant risk and that that time starts supervised and there are a few other default things – and even with the expert evidence and supervised time in a contact centre, you say, “sorry, i am not complying with that”, correct?---yes, we’re not doing it. we’re not doing it.
yes. when the time came around for [x] to spend time with his father at the contact centre and you said i’m not going to do that, why did not you bring the matter back to court?---i just did what’s right for [x]. because you were aware that those orders remained in place and you’re well aware that you were breaching those orders by not complying with them, weren’t they?---yes. and you chose not to bring it back and try to get those orders changed in any way, that’s the case, isn’t it?---i’ve been trying the whole time. you filed no application to get those orders changed after you started – after you stopped - - -?---i’m running on legal aid. yes?---so – you know? yes. at paragraph 116 of your affidavit you say:
while i do not consent to [x] spending supervised time with [mr marella], i completed the intake.
so that’s what – what actually occurred, wasn’t it? you completed the intake but then would not follow through at the time, have i got that right? yes. his honour: sorry, that’s a yes. it’s just that nods don’t come up on the recording?---yes. sorry, yes. dr leslie: yes. yes. okay. so you acknowledge that you were ordered by the court to do it and you did not do it?---yes. is there something special that means that you don’t have to comply with court orders, but other people do?---i’m no one special, that’s definitely not the case. the protection of [x] is the only reason that this action has happened. because you expect - - -?---this whole action. you expect other people to comply with court orders, don’t you?---i comply with anything else. no. listen to my question and answer my question?---go for it. you expect other people to comply with court orders, don’t you?---if it’s not putting them danger – themselves in danger, of course. so it is your view that court orders only apply to people if, in their own view, it doesn’t put them or somebody else in danger?---yes.
all right. so ultimately, your view is you get to choose whether or not you comply with the court orders based on your own assessment?---i get to choose? yes, you get to choose?---i did not – i did not get to choose this man wanting to kill me, i did not choose it. yes. none of that was my question?---this is – i – well, that’s the answer. i – you know, i’ve been forced into this, and i am here. you seek a number of orders. are you familiar with the minute of orders you seek? is that something that you say that you know really well or that you would need to see a copy of because i don’t want to be unfair to you if i want to ask – if i’m going to ask you questions about your orders i want you to know what they are?---yes. i’m pretty sure of what they are. you’re familiar with them?---yes. yes. they’re - - -?---to be summed up really quickly. yes. you seek orders under – i don’t expect you to know the section - - -?---yes, go for it. - - - but you seek them under section 68b of the act that basically restrain [mr marella] from doing a number of things, including attending the residence, be within a certain distance of you, do you recall that order that you’re seeking?---yes, that would be good. yes. you expect him to comply with that order, don’t you?---yes. all right. so you expect him to comply with the order you seek but you don’t have to comply with the orders that the court makes, is that right?---it’s safety. it’s a simple as that.
but do you appreciate how - - -?---hard your job is? there’s an understatement. no. how potentially really dangerous your position is?---i have been in way more of a dangerous situation when i was in that relationship, so this is nothing compared to where we were in. i know that’s your view, i understand?---yes. but if i make orders because there have been this series of defaults - - -?---yes. - - - for [x] to go and live with his dad, what are you going to do?---i won’t let it happen. really?---absolutely not.
yes. do you accept that your behaviour might be understood as being a bit paranoid, [ms bracewell]?---yes. i had a very big guard up. yes. because [mr marella] - - -?---being – someone telling me constantly, you know, “my cousins are going to come get you,” that’s why the guard was there.
and you have no intention of informing him about any decisions you make, do you?---i will do as the court orders. no. but if your orders are made - - -?---yes. - - - you just say, “i get to make the decisions,” and you don’t say that, “i have to tell him.” so if those orders are made, you have no intention of actually telling him because you’re not compelled to?---that would be the court order. that’s right, isn’t it?---so yes, i would go with the court order, whatever the court order said. and you’ve got no intention of allowing [x] to see his extended paternal family, do you?---no. you would not let them speak to – him speak to them on the phone either, would you?---no. okay. and you understand, of course, that the orders might – that the court might not make the orders that you’re seeking, don’t you?---yes. and if the court orders that [x] live with you but that he has to spend time with his dad, you’re not going to facilitate that happening, are you?---no. i will do as the court orders. you will do as the court orders?---yes. so you’ve changed your mind overnight, is that the case?---yes. i’ve got to do – the way that you were asking me did not really add up because it was sort of asking me to gamble him, and i’m not going to gamble him, but i will respect your orders and i will do as the orders say. if it was only decision that it had to be one or the other and there was only – there was only two choices between, you know, in my care with part time or in his care, i would absolutely go with in my care if it was only those two to pick from. his honour: thank you?---yes. dr leslie: if the court orders that it’s in [x’s] best interests – if the court decides it’s in [x’s] best interests and then orders that he go and live with his father, whether that’s immediately, whether it’s if you don’t comply in the future – at any stage, if the court orders that he goes and lives with his father, you’re just not going to hand him over, are you?---i have to do as the court orders.
now, i want to ask you a different question about your anxiety because it has been suggested to you at various times that you need to arrange some counselling to address your anxieties. have you done that?---i only had the two counselling sessions. right. so apart from those two sessions – and they were with [f counsellors] or someone?---yes. or [m counsellors]. okay?---yes. so - - -?---i think it’s [f counsellors], though. so i’m assuming it was pretty inconsequential – i know that’s a big word, but pretty - - -?---yes. it was not very important counselling for you?---no. it was good. very good. okay. well, you did not ask for them to do a report or a letter for the court or anything like that?---yes. i’ve got a, you know, like, attendance just to say that i attended. i think the attendance is about something different. that was - - -?---okay. - - - about a parenting course. but you’ve got nothing saying that – well, if you have, i will be corrected. but you’ve got nothing saying that you did some sort of counselling?---yes. i think i had a – i think i did.
now, you said in your report – i beg your pardon – you told [dr h] that you told [x] that his dad was unwell and that [x] asked you, “is it his heart?” and you said, “no. it’s his brain.” did you say that to [x]?---yes, i think i did. yes. when did you say that to [x]?---later. later than that first initial one. so after you saw [dr h] or before you saw [dr h]?---i don’t know. well, let’s assume it was before because you told - - -?---well, that’s right. yes. - - - [dr h] about it. yes?---that’s right. that makes sense. yes. of course. so [x] would have been about four when you told him that?---yes. that’s adding up. yes. do you think it would have been quite alarming for a four year old to hear that his father had a problem with his brain?---i was trying to keep it simple. but that isn’t keeping it simple?---but yes. that’s something that would alarm - - -?---yes. - - - a small child that his father is sick and has a problem with his brain?---yes. now, [ms k] says that – well, firstly, you’re aware that [ms k] was organised to do an assessment of you for this court?---yes. and it was a very important assessment for the court?---yes. i - - - and legal aid was paying for it?---is it the psych evaluation? yes. the psych evaluation?---yes.
evidence of dr h – report
executive summary [mr marella] and [ms marella] present as two potentially healthy individuals who could have a great deal to offer their son [x]. in 2018 [mr marella] wasn't coping with his occupational traumatic experiences and was on sick leave. [x] born [in 2015] has had problems from prematurity, possible language delay and heart condition. [x]'s heart condition coincided with [mr marella]’s mental health breakdown which in tum led to a breakdown in the relationship between [ms marella] and [mr marella]. from the context of perceived death threats from an unwell [mr marella] (although [mr marella] denied the threats) and in the context of the family murder of [ms marella’s] grandmother by her grandfather, [ms marella] felt she needed to protect herself and [x] by moving into hiding. [mr marella] now has successfully undergone treatment and appears to be mentally well and i believe does not present as an unacceptable risk to [x] or [ms marella]. however [ms marella] has still high degrees of anxiety and fearfulness about [mr marella]. the challenge now is for [mr marella] to maintain his mental stability and for [ms marella] to overcome her fear and anxiety in order to allow [x] to gradually develop a relationship with [mr marella] whom he has not seen since november 2018. this report has been prepared as an independent assessment for the family court of australia. the general principles upon which i operate are: the principle that the welfare of the child is the paramount consideration. the principle of the psychological parent. the principle of the least detrimental available alternative. the principle of conciliation and reconciliation. the principle of shared parental responsibility. the principle of the importance of having a relationship with both parents...
chronology [x] was born [in 2015]. he was diagnosed with heart problems in 2018 and 20/4/18 the father was diagnosed with ptsd and major depression from work. on 20/9/18 [x] has heart surgery and a pacemaker. on 1/11/18 the couple separated and at the same time the father expressed he was feeling depressed. on 6/11/18 as outlined in the father's affidavit of29/1/20 pages 36 of 74 annexure, the father attended the maternal grandparents' home and the maternal grandfather grabbed the father by the shoulders, yelled at him and was holding a shovel. on 8/11/18 the father attended with the police and the mother did not permit him to see the child. the father attended the police to take out an a vo against the maternal grandfather because of the incident on 6/11/18. on 13/11/18 the mother went to the police and reported incidents of domestic violence in the relationship. the father then was admitted to [q] clinic on 15/11/18 under [dr o], psychiatrist. the paternal grandparents were able to see [x] on 28/11/18. on 14/1/19 [mr marella] was discharged from [q] clinic. the father's appeal against the advo was dismissed on.7/8/19 and so the advo was upheld for 2 years...
mental state examination [ms marella] presented as a pleasant woman who was in a separate area from her son although [x] at times did approach her. [ms marella] presented as an attractive blonde haired woman who was wearing a coat. she appeared to be neatly dressed and well presented. [ms marella’s] speech was normal in tone and volume. there was no abnormality of perception. [ms marella’s] affect was reactive. however, at times when discussing her son's illness she became quite tearful and distressed and was worried about his heart. [ms marella] also became quite elevated in her level of fearfulness when discussing [mr marella] and her fears about [mr marella]. her belief was that [mr marella] was unstable and unsafe and was a potential risk of harm to her and to [x] ... i asked about her father [mr ac]. [ms marella] reported that her paternal grandfather was violent towards her paternal grandmother which resulted in the death of her grandmother. as a young adult [mr ac] was living away from his home. his mother and father had a domestic violence relationship. at the time of the grandmother's death, at home was [mr ac’s] brother, who was 16 years. there was a lot of alcohol abuse and physical violence. as far as [ms marella] knew, when her father became aware that her grandmother had been [murdered], [mr ac] came to her aid but she died in his arms. the tragedy was an enormous emotional blow to her father. nevertheless, [ms marella]said that [mr ac] was able to put this tragedy behind him. he had met ms marella's mother at this stage and they had a beautiful supportive relationship. "he learnt to be happy with what you have." the grandfather has perhaps died in jail. her father never held a grudge against anyone. clearly this tragedy was a sensitising event regarding potential domestic violence as [ms marella]was particularly close to her father... relationship history [ms marella]explained that her parents had had a beautiful story-book ideal relationship by meeting each other at a young age and being happily married and supportive. she'd hoped to have the same experience. [ms marella] repeated the term beautiful family several times... they were living together in the first house in [city c], before they moved to the current address when she was pregnant in 2015. the pregnancy was normal even though there was a high risk because of the pregnancy. the birth was at 36 weeks gestation. [ms marella] had an early labour and was admitted to hospital and a caesarean was conducted. it was quite traumatic. the baby was taken away, "he was whisked away to canberra." it was very stressful to have a newborn baby taken away. there was a heart murmur and some concern about his heart. he was seen by a cardiologist. there was a worrying incident when [mr marella] was possibly asleep and he was stabbing himself with a butter knife. [ms marella] woke him and he said, "i’m hitting you. " yet he was asleep. "i thought he was asleep. i don't know. " i asked whether he was sleepwalking. [ms marella] seemed to think that he may have been sleepwalking but she wasn't sure. 2018 was a difficult year as later in 2018 there were two major heart surgeries, which did not go according to plan for [x]. he had a whole in the heart and there was concern about his growth. there were complications and he needed a pace-maker inserted. knowing the importance of electricity because of the pace-maker [ms marella] was shocked when [mr marella]’s parents decided to cut off the electricity. [mr marella]’s behaviour continued to be erratic. "he wanted to kill a list of people. i thought he was a sleep. " because [ms marella]was concerned about [mr marella]’s erratic behaviour and she was worried about [x]'s heart, [ms marella’s] parents then moved into the house. [ms marella] acknowledged that the marriage and relationship had been satisfactory before 2018. i asked about domestic violence. [ms marella] stated that there was an incident when [mr marella] put his hands around her neck. "he put hands around me and said words like 'to kill'. " "he said i was never going to leave him. he said 'i will kill you."' it was [ms marella’s] belief that [mr marella] threatened to kill her sister and brother-in-law. he said, "i will kill your sister. he said it over and over." i asked why he threatened to kill her sister and she wasn't able to give me any clarification. "we would sit down over a tea and coffee and he would say he would kill my sister. " it seemed rather incongruous that they would sit over a cup of coffee and he would threaten to kill her sister. it was difficult to get a clear context as to whether at the time [ms marella] believed that [mr marella] was believably threatening to kill her sister or whether there was some other explanation. the surgeries for [x] were done in [late] 2018. [mr marella] did not seem to be coping very well. "he was meant to look after me. " there was a time when they went to mcdonalds and [ms marella]was alarmed because [mr marella] was taking attention to [ms marella’s] wellbeing and he was intent on getting tokens for the monopoly game at mcdonalds. "i was gobsmacked." she was shocked because she felt that he was focusing on trivia and worrying about himself rather than worrying about her and [x] ... after he went to hospital [ms marella] confided in her parents and said that [mr marella] had been making threats to kill her, her sister and brother-in-law. "he said if i left him, he would come after me. he said that he would put his cousins onto me and they would come and get me. "... [ms marella] did not find [ms ad] or [mr ae] supportive. [ms marella] is still living at the same address but she is able to remain safe as if [mr marella] is likely to visit home she will move out of town when it's unsafe. she knows it's unsafe because of christmas and easter when he may come and visit. "i move somewhere when i know when he's going to be in town." i asked how she knew precisely his whereabouts however she wasn't able to tell me how she knew his precise location. it seemed confusing that she thought it was safe to stay in her house but then leave town at easter and christmas because he would probably be in town. i wasn't sure how she was able to ensure [mr marella]’s whereabouts. [mr marella] (30 years of age - d.o.b. [1989]) mental state examination [mr marella] was interviewed via video. [mr marella] was wearing a t-shirt with a beard. he had dark hair which was short and neatly groomed. he appeared to be tidy in his presentation and of medium build. [mr marella]’s speech was normal and tone volume. there was no abnormality of perception. [mr marella]’s affect as reactive. [mr marella]’s cognitive function appeared normal. his thoughts were logical. [mr marella] believed that his emotional condition had now improved and he was hoping to reconnect with his son although he did acknowledge that he was now on a disability payment for the injuries that was caused while he was working as a [public servant]... in 2011 [mr marella] decided to work for the [employer t] and he became an [public servant] where he worked from mid-2011 until 2018 and was eventually terminated in september 2019. [mr marella] was on sick leave from 2018 as he found the role extremely stressful. [mr marella] said there was a broad role in his work including dealing with [the community]. he was required to [deal with] a range of community issues. [mr marella] found that he was constantly under pressure from the general public. "i had death threats against me." there wasn't any help from his employer. in early 2018 [mr marella] wanted a change from the position where he was experiencing a lot of abuse. he asked for a change but his manager refused. subsequently this led to a problem. "i had a breakdown. i couldn't get out of bed. i felt i was being followed. " his condition deteriorated and during 2018 he became worse in his mental state. he had threats against him. "i feared they would follow and come to where i lived. " as his vehicle was marked and it was clear that he was the [public servant], people would approach him. "i never had a break." the pressure was relentless and he always felt under threat. "people spat at me." he needed to wear a uniform and this also attracted more abuse. when he was under pressure and needed some counselling, he was sent to a counsellor to talk to about his situation but unfortunately the counsellor also had some gripes about the measures which she had experienced with the [employer t], which impacted upon the support from the counsellor... past psychiatric history [mr marella] has never had any anxiety or depression previously. there was an inference from the stress that he experienced just before he got married and then around [ms marella’s] birthday that he went missing for a short period of time suggesting that he may have been emotionally vulnerable. nevertheless, there was never any anxiety or depression diagnosed prior to the work stress. [mr marella] saw the general practitioner and there was workers compensation. he was feeling bullied. he was started on medication and saw a psychologist every 6 weeks. in 2018 [mr marella] became unwell and wasn't able to work. he saw a psychiatrist in [city af]. he was at home from april until september 2018. at the time he was spending a lot of time with [x] ... the treatment was trauma therapy as he was getting nightmares and was dreaming about dying. he felt he was in a cage. he would have flashbacks about being threatened and [carrying out work duties]. he was hypervigilant and anxious and avoidant of any confrontation. his mood was irritable. he was fearful that people would attack him. he would startle when the phone vibrated. he avoided answering the phone in case somebody might threaten him... current routine currently, [mr marella] gets up at 7am, has breakfast and a shower. [mr marella]’s time is occupied as he is working on the legal case for the family court and also the avo matter. there were discrepancies between the police report and [ms marella’s] affidavit about being held by the throat. he denied that he had ever harmed or threatened [ms marella] and claimed there was no domestic violence. in addition, [mr marella] has completed the triple p parenting course and parenting after separation course. he believed that [ms marella] should also do this course. in the afternoons, he relaxes and then cooks. he likes doing puzzles. on the weekends he relaxes and goes to cafes. currently he's staying in canberra. the situation changed dramatically when [mr marella] was admitted to [q] clinic as the relationship with [ms marella] and her parents deteriorated. it was [mr marella]’s view that [mr ac] couldn't cope with the fact that [mr marella] had some mental health issues and that he related his own fathers problems and projected that onto [mr marella]’s problems. "he had a rough childhood. his father murdered his mother. his father was an alcoholic. he believed that you 're a murderer if you have a mental health problem." [mr ac] had a traumatic childhood and was still traumatised by the death of his mother. [mr ac]’s fear, he believed had infected [ms marella] who was now overly anxious and had over reacted. "he's the cause of why she left. the police put an avo on him. he attacked me. then 5 days later they put one on me. " [mr marella] acknowledged that he approached the police first, however [mr marella] had only wanted to report the behaviour of [mr ac] not to place an avo on him. it was the police who decided to invoke the avo, "i just wanted to make a report. " the early part of the marriage was happy. the pregnancy with [x] was a complicated because of [ms marella’s] diabetes. he was born prematurely by caesarean. after the birth, [x] was taken to canberra and [ms marella] was still in [city c]. they drove to canberra. it was noted that he had a heart murmur and that his organs had shutdown because of the mother's diabetes. his blood sugar levels were low. it took 10 days to stabilise [x] in hospital... the relationship between [mr marella] and [ms marella] was good. "before [q] clinic there were no problems. her father brainwashed her. i don't have a gun. i got rid of it. " the allegations that he was going to kill people and shoot people were false, [mr marella] claimed. "she thinks i will shoot her. her father couldn't handle the fact that i have ptsd. " i asked about [x]'s heart. [ms marella] noticed in june or july 2018 that there was a loud heart sound and so she sought medical assistance. [x] was taken to canberra for a scan. they found that there was a growth in the heart and he had two operations. the operations were conducted in 2018. unfortunately, there was a problem and a pace maker needed to be inserted. after the admission to [q] clinic and the avo's that were put on each other, [ms marella] approached [mr marella]. "she put an avo on me but she came and said she loved me." [mr marella] claimed there was never any domestic violence and there were never any incidents of threat to kill anyone. "she came and said she loves me." when [mr marella] was in [q] clinic, [ms marella] returned to [city c]. because there was an avo in place [mr marella] decided to stay in sydney for 12 months, as he did not want to risk breaking the avo or being charged. in 2019 he used superannuation to support himself. he moved to canberra in 2020. i asked him to explain more about the violence allegations. [mr marella] claimed that the allegations about threats and violence were false. he did have a gun previously which was used for [hunting]. the gun was interpreted as a threat an so he removed the gun. he's never threatened to harm anyone. there were weird allegations against him he claimed that he was part of the mafia and that he was going to kill her sister and brother-in-law. [mr marella] claimed that this was false. i asked about the strangling around the throat. [mr marella] said, "that's ridiculous. " he never hurt her. he always took care of her. he now regrets that the a vo was taken out against her father. "the police did it. the retaliatory avo was because her father prompted it. " i asked about the holding around the throat again. he smiled, "i never held her around the throat." i asked about the 2018 episode when he was sleep-walking. he claimed that he did sleep-walk and this was at a time when he was under particular stress through the [employer t] and he had a butter knife and had cuts on his chest and leg from the butter knife. nevertheless, there was never any serious injuries to himself and he believed that there was no serious threat to [x] or [ms marella]...   ac] (telephone interview 22/7/2020) [mr ac] and [ms ag] were in [town ah] when the interviews was conducted by telephone on 22/7/2020. [mr ac] explained that [ms marella] was a very wanted child. there had been 3 miscarriages prior to [ms marella’s] birth. [ms marella] had 2 older siblings. as a young child she was much loved and protected. she did well in primary school and then again in high school. she as a happy confident girl. she attended [aj school] and started [a trade]. she always progressed well. she did well in her work as a [tradesperson]. diabetes was diagnosed at the age of 8. she's always been on insulin since the diagnosis and [ms marella] has managed the diabetes well herself. i mentioned that she had an rsi problem as a [tradesperson] and [mr ac] said he did not have a clear memory of his but if there was a problem it seemed to improve. the relationship with [mr marella] was close. [mr ac] went to school with [ms marella’s] uncle. the families were close. he related very well to [mr marella], "i still love the guy." it's sad that this situation has deteriorated in his work as a [public servant] for the [employer t]. he began chasing compensation claim. "he stopped work. he wasn't doing anything. i supported him. he was the [public servant]. " he was needing to deal with the public and was finding this difficult. it was [mr ac’s] view that [mr marella] may have struggled in his development because the family had a handicapped eldest child which may have impacted on the wellbeing of [mr marella] with some of his needs neglected. the family were of [country ak] background. [mr marella] appeared to be vulnerable to stress at times and he disappeared for a short time just before the wedding. when [x] was having surgery he was struggling. he tried to start at go fund me page which [ms marella] did not want. "he went off the rails." it was only after he disappeared and [ms marella] said that she was feeling threatened by him that [mr ac] and [ms ag] became concerned about the threat that [mr marella] posed. [ms marella] reported to him that [mr marella] had grabbed her by the throat and that there were threats to kill their other daughter [ms al] and her husband. they had heard that [mr marella] had talked about what it would be like to kill someone. "i was closer to him than his family." i asked [mr ac] if he'd ever seen [mr marella] threaten or harm anyone or if he'd ever behaved in a way that made him frightened. there was no response from [mr ac]. he wasn't able to recall any specific episode that he had witnessed first-hand. however, [mr ac] did say that [mr marella] had put an avo on him. then [mr marella] had kissed him and tried to make up to him, "he kissed me and said, 'you're my best friend'." he did see that [mr marella] struggled with the pressure on him. [mr marella] had tried to kill himself with a butter knife and after this incident [mr ac] and [ms ag] moved to the house with [ms marella] to protect her, "we stayed with them to stop him killing himself. he punched the pillow. he was looking over his shoulder the whole time. he thought people from the [employer t] were tracking him. he was struggling with what was real and what was not real." the admission to [q] clinic was a time when they were able to take [x] back to [city c]. [mr marella] had tried to take [x] after his operation which they felt was unsafe. [mr ac] said, "he had guns, he was paranoid. i used to go hunting with him. he had weapons buried." i asked if there were any problems when they went hunting together and [mr ac] denied that he'd ever witnessed any problems with [mr marella]’s behaviour first-hand. "he speaks dangerous." i asked if he believed that that [mr marella] was a danger to others. [mr ac] said, "it's hard to say". i asked what it was that made him fearful that [mr marella] was dangerous. "it's more his demeaner. he came to get [x] back. he grabbed [x] and abducted him. he took him in his arms and ran and said, '[ms marella] you come too'." then the police came and said, "no put the boy down." on this occasion he had already had the avo four days before. it was [mr ac’s] view that the medication was making [mr marella] worse. i said, "get off the meds, get off the stuff " [mr marella] attended the general practitioner for compensation, "i said put it down the toilet. the drugs were making him worse, put it down the toilet. he was addicted to the meds." it was [mr ac’s] view that the medication was making [mr marella] worse. he was behaving erratically, "he tried to kill himself with a butter knife. he was sleep walking. it was a worry. he punched the pillow." they were at [location u] and [mr marella] disappeared. when [ms marella] refused to do the go fund me page, he found this difficult to cope with. "he took off, he was broken". [ms marella] was fed up with the pressure from [mr marella]. "[mr marella] was on the point of collapse." [ms marella] said that she couldn't go back to him. "she told us that he had her around the throat, up against the wall. he was controlling. he was fixated on money. he took $17,000 from the joint account. he never paid her anything." there was a 2 year avo for [ms marella] and [x]. after 18 months he made an application to see [x]. "why did he wait 18 months. if he'd applied earlier, he may have been able to get visitation." [mr ac] was upset, "he dropped an avo on me. [mr ae] said there was nothing wrong with him." as a safety measure [ms marella] would go and stay at different places so that [mr marella] couldn't find her and [x]. i asked if there were any worrying signs earlier about [ms marella’s] mental health. before the wedding [mr marella] disappeared and ran off for a week which was worrying. at other times he couldn't cope with the pressure. he also almost died once because from mycoplasma pneumonia. i asked what his main fear. "i loved him like a son, we got on well, but he had [ms marella] around her throat. he would go [hunting]. he hid guns. he took [x] after the operation. he was no financial support to [ms marella]. he was out of it and paranoid. he cut himself with a butter knife. he punched the pillow. he took off before the wedding. he disappeared in hospital after the go fund me page. [mr ae] said there was nothing wrong. he took out an avo on [mr ac]. there were concerns about the mafia being connected to the solicitor. he threatened to kill [ms marella's] sister. " i asked what they wanted for [x]. [mr ac] said that they want [x] to be happy and stable and to be with [ms marella]. "if he had come back to us after 2 months then [x] would be seeing him. now it's too long. [x] doesn't know him." [mr ac] believed it was now too late and that [mr marella] was a complete stranger. there was focus on his sister but they did not trust his sister. "she's a bad influence." [mr ac] was concerned that they had a high profile solicitor to represent them, [mr am] who had a connection with the mafia. i asked about the murder of his mother. [mr ac] said that his father was an abusive alcoholic and that he grew up in an abusive violent household. his father would hit and hurt his mother. his brother was 16 and would also have conflict with their father. "he made sure my father got punished." there was obviously conflict between [mr ac’s] father and [mr ac’s] brother. [mr ac’s] father was an alcoholic and on prescription medications which was also a worry for [mr ac] about [mr marella]. [mr ac’s] father [murdered] his mother. when he arrived at the house she had died. therefore he had witnessed first hand that it was possible for people to threaten to kill and then complete the task, as his father had killed his mother and he then went to jail. [mr ac] was concerned that [mr marella] wasn't aware that he had been abusive towards [ms marella]. i asked what could be done if [mr marella] was successfully treated and was well. [mr ac] wasn't sure what should happen in that case. however, [ms marella] is still fearful. perhaps, when [x] is older such as the age of 10 when he's able to protect himself. "we need to know he was safe. he'll bolt with the boy. he's done it before." it was [mr ac’s] concern that [mr marella] may abscond with [x]. nevertheless, when [x]'s old enough [mr ac] does believe that a relationship may be possible between [x] and [mr marella], "i'm not a doctor. i don't know when. i'll do what the experts say." nevertheless, travelling to [city b] is not a good idea because of the distance... [ms marella] added that she believed that the court process was not driven by [mr marella] and that it was his parents who wanted contact with [mr marella] and [mr marella]’s parents, [ms marella] believed were concerned about social perception. "it's what society wants. his mother is a social person. " i asked what [ms marella] wanted the court to decide. she said for her it was clear. she as planning to talk to [m counsellors] to get a report from them which she believed would indicate there was no benefit in [x] having a relationship with his father...
opinion after careful consideration of the interviews conducted and the material examined, i formed the following opinions: the nature of the relationship between [ms marella] and [x]. [ms marella] is a 28-year-old woman who was the youngest of 3 siblings, born following 3 miscarriages and so was a specially appreciated child. her development was normal although at the age of 8 she developed diabetes which needed to be managed carefully. nevertheless, she progressed through primary school and high school without any major emotional or health complications. [ms marella] valued the close family unit. she grew up in the [city c] area and was close to her older sister and brother. her parents had been together from an early age. of note, was the fact that [ms marella’s] father grew up in a household of domestic violence. [ms marella’s] paternal grandfather reportedly had severe behavioural and alcohol problems and [mr ac] was exposed to domestic violence. [mr ac’s] father had a gun and [murdered] [ms marella’s] grandmother and she died when [mr ac] arrived to try and save her. despite the traumatic murder of his mother, [mr ac] was still able to form a stable relationship with [ms ag] and [ms marella] enjoyed a stable loving home, in which she was raised. [ms marella] formed a relationship with [mr marella] which appeared to be reasonably stable, although at times [mr marella] had difficulty managing stress. nevertheless, they successfully proceeded with the pregnancy with [x], which was carefully managed due to gestational diabetes. there were some difficulties towards the end of the pregnancy and [x] was born prematurely at 36 weeks gestation. there was an emergency caesarean and [x] was taken to canberra for acute care as a neonate whilst [ms marella] was still at [city c] hospital. [x] was resuscitated and was able to go home but there was an enormous amount of stress with concern about his development which appeared to be normal although his language is still developing. [x] was born [in 2015]. in early 2018 when [x] was about 2 ½ years old there was a discovery of a heart condition which also coincided with the time when [mr marella] was struggling with his mental health issues. [x] needed heart surgery and there were complications. there was a second heart surgery conducted a month later in [late] 2018. [ms marella] was very focused on caring for [x] and [mr marella] was having difficulties coping with trauma and poor mental health. consequently in november 2018 when [mr marella] was admitted to hospital at [q] clinic they separated as [ms marella] needed to be fully able to focus on caring for and protecting [x] as she felt [mr marella] was now too unwell and too dangerous. [ms marella] later disclosed to her parents there had been episodes she felt were indicative of potential domestic violence or domestic violence including an episode where she felt she was being choked. she was fearful of [mr marella's] mental health instability and so she moved into hiding and has been protecting herself and [x] since that time. [x] appears to be developing well in her care. he's a happy healthy child who possibly has some language issues. [x] physically he appears to be developing well, with a pacemaker because of his heart issues. there is reportedly a strong attachment between [x] and [ms marella]. [ms marella] is devoted to helping [x]. [ms marella's] been caring for [x] in a stable home environment however at times when she feels she could be under potential threat should [mr marella] potentially be coming to the town then she may move to a place of hiding. nevertheless [ms marella] has good support from family and friends and she's been able to continue to provide well for [x]. the mental health of [ms marella]. [ms marella] has never had any serious problems with anxiety, depression or psychosis. she's coped well with enormous amounts of stress. she's managed her diabetes from the age of 8 and [ms marella] did have some repetitive strain injury for a period of time. [ms marella] was able to modify her work and the injury to her hand improved. she has been able to function as a single parent caring for her child. she tried to support [mr marella] but did not find that he could support her as she was also trying to care for her child who had a serious heart condition. i found no evidence of any significant anxiety or depression. she's never had any suicidal feelings. in terms of her personality she's had a stable early stability in her life and she did well in primary and high school. her development has been healthy and normal. i found no evidence to suggest that there was any personality disturbance as she has been able cope well in general. the parenting capacity of [ms marella] the parenting capacity refers to the ability of the parent to provide for the biological, psychological and social needs of a child and be able to protect the child from harm. [ms marella] was quite capable for providing for the biological, psychological and social needs of [x]. [ms marella] is very focused on [x]'s wellbeing as she wants to promote his health and protect him. [x] has a serious heart condition and has had life threatening heart surgery, which was very stressful. [ms marella] also has diabetes which she manages herself. [ms marella] appears quite capable of providing well for [x]'s needs. she has good support from her immediate family, parents and siblings. [ms marella] had concern about [mr marella's] health and wellbeing and therefore as [mr marella] became unwell mentally, [ms marella] felt it was more important to protect [x] should [mr marella] become so unwell as to present a risk to [x]. [ms marella] does find it difficult to know how to assess level of risk of [mr marella], i believe, as does her father [mr ac]. it's difficult for her to know how well or unwell [mr marella] is psychiatrically and whether he presents an unacceptable risk of harm. additionally from her perspective it's been a long time that [x] has seen [mr marella] and so she can't see the immediate benefit of restarting a relationship, particularly if there are risk issues. there is still a great deal of anxiety and fearfulness. however, i do believe that she's finding it difficult to overcome her fears, particularly in the context of her murdered grandmother, to see the long-term benefits of being able to promote a relationship between the child and the father. 4. the nature of the relationship between [mr marella] and [x]. [mr marella] is the youngest of 4 siblings, who had a stable caring childhood. there were no traumatic experiences and he progressed satisfactorily throughout school. he'd not had any serious illnesses or health concerns. after leaving school [mr marella] completed his apprenticeship and worked for a number of years before joining the [employer t] as a [public servant]. [mr marella] met [ms marella] when he was 18 and she was 17. the relationship progressed well as they met in 2008 and married in 2012. [x] was born [in 2015]. it was quite stressful as [ms marella] had diabetes and [x] had prematurity being born at 36 weeks and he seemed to recover although there potentially were issues with his development. [mr marella] began working for the [employer t] as a [public servant], which was a highly stressful job. [mr marella] found the job attracted threats and difficult situations until eventually he became unwell psychologically and stopped work in 2018. during this time of high stress where he was psychologically injured by his work environment, [mr marella's] son [x] was diagnosed with serious heart problems. [mr marella] was at home unwell from his work-related stress condition, with [x]. [mr marella] described having a close loving relationship with [x], whom he would take to his sister's house and they would spend time with the paternal grandparents. in all likelihood, [mr marella] developed a close loving relationship with [x] and [x] probably had some early attachment to [mr marella]. however, [mr marella's] had no contact with [x] now since late 2018 and so it is possible that [x] may not have any clear memory of [mr marella]. children generally are amnestic before the age of3 or 4 years. however, it would not take long for [x] to develop new memories and a new relationship. at present, it doesn't appear to be likely there is currently a strong relationship between [x] and [mr marella]. the mental health of [mr marella]. [mr marella] had not had any anxiety or depression as a child or teenager. he'd been stable and healthy. he did an apprenticeship in engineering and worked for over 5 ½ years., but problems first developed in the context of his job as a [public servant] for the [employer t] which began in mid-2011. [mr marella] achieved a promotion to a senior role, perhaps beyond his capabilities, and as a result he developed severe anxiety and depression. [mr marella] became overwhelmed with the responsibility and fears in relation to his work at the [employer t], as there were constant threats and constant exposure to abuse from the general public and other traumatic aspects dealing with people and animals who had died. increasingly as anxiety heightened and [mr marella] became fearful that people were following him. there may have even been a degree of suspiciousness where [mr marella] possibly with overvalued ideas believed people were starting to stalk him. the situation became unmanageable and he stopped work in [ms marella] 2018 and applied for workers compensation. it would appear that [mr marella] was overwhelmed and wasn't coping particularly well, resulting in an inability to support [ms marella] and [x] at a critical time of stress. to his credit, [mr marella] eventually decided to go into hospital and was admitted to [q] clinic under [dr o]. he was treated for anxiety and depression over 2 months. [dr o] reported the condition improved significantly and [mr marella] was released and has reportedly remained mentally well since that time. with regard to [mr marella's] diagnosis it did appear that he developed features consistent with dsm 5 criteria of post-traumatic stress disorder. he was experiencing traumatic dreams and intrusive memories. he was avoidant of going to work, he was emotionally quite remote, and this was impacting on [ms marella] and he was hypervigilant and anxious. he also developed some significant depression with some suicidal thinking, he was not caring for himself well and was feeling more desperate and hopeless. these features are consistent with major depression. it does appear that these conditions have no improved and his mental health problems are now in remission and he's being maintained on medication and monitoring by his psychiatrist. from a personality perspective there is no history to suggest personality disorder although he has increased vulnerability to depression when under stress. he had good early stability, coped adequately in primary school and high school. [mr marella] according to [ms marella] did seem to struggle at times of stress, even before the marriage. although he enjoyed [hunting], this was a pastime that he shared with his father-in-law, i did not find any evidence that he had any antisocial tendencies. there was no evidence to suggest that he had borderline personality disorder, usually characterised by emotional dysregulation and repeated self-harm. in all, i formed the view that there was no personality disorder but perhaps some vulnerability to stress and anxiety. he developed traumatic stress disorder and major depression from his work-related stress. [mr marella] has now been treated and he's functioning much better although [mr marella's] not able to return to work and has been labelled totally and permanently impaired. with regard to differential diagnosis for the psychiatric disorder, the other possibility apart from post-traumatic stress disorder or major depression is a psychosis. it is possible that [mr marella] has or has in the past suffered from a psychotic illness with possibly a paranoid disorder. he was worried that people were following him and that people were trying to harm him. i wasn't able to find any evidence from the history or from the letters from [dr o] that there was any sign of psychosis suggesting that he had paranoid or psychotic disorder. however, when he was as under a lot of stress, he did acknowledge that he was fearful about people targeting him and following him. the other possibility of course is because of his role as a [public servant] that in fact, some people may have been targeting him. from a personality perspective with regard to dangerousness, one would normally look at the previous history of antisocial or dangerous acts as a guide for the risk for future or antisocial dangerous acts. i am not aware that there have been any previous antisocial dangerous acts that would raise concern about [mr marella] being a potential danger to others. in terms of dangerousness in the context of psychiatric illness, the best indicators for dangerousness relate to whether one has a seriously unwell mental state with clear ideas, perhaps psychotic ideas that could be a danger in terms of bizarre delusional ideas regarding needing to harm someone else. i am not aware that he's had any delusional ideas that would qualify or raise concerns about potential danger from a mental illness perspective. i am not able to form a clear view about [ms marella's] perception of threats to her sister and brother-in-law, which [mr marella] denied. i am not able to form a clear view about whether he was domestically a threat to her. it's quite possible that under the pressure of his major depression that he was psychologically unwell and may have presented as an unacceptable risk at that time when he was unwell. according to his psychiatrist he's now been treated and responded well to treatment. if the psychiatrist is correct and his view accepted that [ms marella's] condition is in remission then i believe on balance, the probability is that [mr marella] is unlikely an unacceptable risk to others and unlikely to be an unacceptable risk to [x]. the parenting capacity of [mr marella]. the parenting capacity refers to the ability of the parent to provide for the biological, psychological and social needs of a child and be able to protect the child from harm. according to what [mr marella] has reported to me and his sister and parents, he is now caring for himself. he's living in canberra and previously had lived in sydney. he was preparing for his court case. [mr marella] was previously quite capable and working full time in a responsible role. i found no reason to suggest that he would not be able to provide for the physical needs of the child. for a short period of time i am not aware of any reason to suggest that he would not be able to care for a child for short periods of time. from a psychological and social perspective [mr marella] might struggle to care for a child if [mr marella] is under stress. however i believe that he does want to support a relationship between the child and the mother. he hopes to be able to contribute to his child's wellbeing. i am not aware that he has ever presented a serious threat or danger to others. whilst he may not be able to cope with the stress and pressure of taking on heavy responsibility at times, i believe that [mr marella] would be able to take on brief periods of responsibility and care of a child. from a mental health perspective if [mr marella] remains mentally well there was no indication that [mr marella] is an unacceptable risk of harm to the child. the allegations of domestic violence. [ms marella's] fears and anxieties were based on the fact that she had first-hand experience of [mr marella] being unstable and also this was supported by concerns from her parents. the concerns raised included being held around the throat by [mr marella] who had a history of shooting [wild animals]. [mr marella] did try to take [x] away from the grandparents after his operation and [mr marella] wasn't financially supportive to [ms marella]. [mr marella] had an episode of a sleep disorder where he was sleep-walking and appeared to be attempting to cut himself with a butter knife and punched a pillow. there was conflict with [mr ac] resulting in police action and there were expressed concerns that he had a connection with the mafia and a concern that he had made threats to kill [ms marella's] sister and brother-in-law. these concerns appeared to form the basis of [ms marella's] anxiety and concerns. should the allegations of domestic violence be upheld as being an unacceptable risk then this could change the perspective of how to allow contact. however, if the court finds that there is not an unacceptable risk of violence towards [ms marella] or the child, [ms marella] is still likely to find it challenging for her to overcome her fears and anxieties. with regard to the threats to kill family i'm not sure i can form a clear view as to what these threats mean and how they should be construed. i am not aware of [mr marella] actively or intentionally trying to harm any other person that would suggest that his threats are of significant concern. i am not in a position to form a clear view about the seriousness of [ms marella's] allegations and fears, however i found there was no unacceptable risk to the child from a mental health or personality perspective. formulation. [mr marella] and [ms marella] are from the [city c] area in ns w, where they both were raised in close loving families and developed well. [ms marella] managed to cope well despite diabetes starting when she was about the age of 8. for both [ms marella] and [mr marella] their relationship started in 2008 and this was their first significant relationship. they married [in 2012]. they had a child [x] born [in 2015]. the relationship between [ms marella] and [mr marella] appeared to be stable. [mr marella] had a very close [mr ac] and [ms ag] would go away hunting and on various trips together. [ms marella] was not as close to [mr marella's] parents but there did not appear to be any major problems. it was important to note that [ms marella's] paternal grandfather who had alcohol and mental health problems murdered her paternal grandmother when [mr ac] was a young adult. [ms marella] was spending most of her time caring for [x] who was a vulnerable child. [mr marella] was struggling to cope with his job which he found traumatic and he stopped work in 2018 at about the same time [x] was diagnosed with heart disease. whilst under great stress, [mr marella] had an episode where he was sleep-walking and appeared to be attempting to cut himself with a butter knife and punched a pillow, which alarmed [ms marella]. the stress of the heart problem and [mr marella's] mental problems seemed to overwhelm the relationship as there were concerns that [mr marella] was erratic and maybe a threat. [ms marella] presumed that [mr marella], if unwell could potentially get access to firearms and kill her. there was an incident after [x] had his heart surgery that [mr marella] tried to take [x] and [ms marella] away from the maternal grandparents, which led to avo's being taken out against each other. [mr marella] was in hospital for 2 months at [q] clinic and reportedly made a good recovery. however, because of the avo he remained in sydney for a year and then in 2019 and moved to canberra in 2020. he's been careful not breach is avo for fear of legal ramifications. [ms marella] has continued to be fearful that she could be stalked or attacked and regularly goes in to hiding to protect herself and [x]. currently it appears that [mr marella] has responded well to treatment. [x] hadn't seen his father since november 2018 and so he may not have a clear memory of his father. [ms marella] continues to be very fearful that [mr marella] may be unstable and could be a danger to her. [mr marella] feels that he's now stable and that he would like to be able to reconnect with x and contribute to his life. both sets of grandparents are supportive and both had a good relationship with their respective daughter-in-law and son-in-law even though there is a degree of suspicion between the grandparents now. it did appear that the paternal grandparents [mr ae] and [ms ab] have a degree of respect and care for [ms marella] and do want to embrace and support her if possible. it also appears that [mr ac] and [ms ag] care for [mr marella] and if their daughter had not felt threatened by [mr marella], they would have wanted to continue to support him. therefore currently it does appear that [ms marella] is well and stable and caring for [x] who's having his needs met as well as possible. [mr marella] is keeping a distance for fear of breaking the a vo and hoping that he may be able to remain well and then reconnect with [x] potentially. possible outcomes 1. should [x] continue to reside with [ms marella] i believe that he will develop as well as possible in the short-term. if there is no contact with [ms marella] in the short-term there would be no significant loss as [x] has not had a clear relationship with [mr marella] for the past 18 months. however, as he becomes older in primary school and as an adolescent, i believe that he would start to wonder why he has not been able to see his father and has not been able to develop a relationship with his father and partner grandparents. therefore, this would be a significant sad loss and confusing for [x] in the long term not to know his father. 2. the second possibility is to wait until perhaps [x] is of an age, perhaps 10 years where he may be able to be more competent and know that if his physical health is stable and he's been able to progress satisfactorily at school. his developmental issues have been clarified. [mr marella] will have been able to establish himself and maintain his stability for a number of years and before contact of some form is reintroduced. this nevertheless would be sad for [x] not to know his father for another number of years but would protect x and [ms marella] from the fear and stress involved with arranging contact with [mr marella]. 3. the third possibility would be reintroducing some form of contact gradually. perhaps in a limited way initially and potentially growing to regular contact. it is likely that [ms marella] would find this overwhelming initially. she has significant fear. there's the spectre of [mr marella] being a murderer, like [mr ac’s] father and so it is perhaps understandable that [ms marella] could have these concerns. however the challenge is finding a way of having proportionate concerns may be difficult for her if there is no significant risk of harm to her and [x].
recommendations 1. i recommend that [x] continue to reside with [ms marella] who presents as a capable caring parent who can continue to care and monitor his long-term welfare. she has good supports. [x] appears to be developing as well as possible in her care. 2. i recommend that in terms of contact i believe that some card or video contact could be possible for six months. after six months i would recommend that some supervised contact could be helpful perhaps for one year initially at a contact centre on a monthly basis. if after 1 year [mr marella] has remained well and stable then some mediation between the two families could be looked at to explore more regular perhaps day-time contact with other family present such as the paternal grandparents. day time contact may be as much as [mr marella] could confidently cope with perhaps up until the age of 10. 3. i recommend that neither parent should denigrate the other parent in front of the child. 4. i recommend that neither parent should use any drugs or alcohol or physical punishment. 5. i recommend that both parents do parenting-after-separation courses. 6. i recommend that the father continue with his treatment through his psychiatrist. 7. in addition would be helpful for psychological treatment to resolve [mr marella's] post-traumatic stress symptoms as this has had a significant bearing on the welfare of his child and the breakdown of the relationship with [ms marella]. trauma-focussed cbt is usually about 16 sessions with a trained clinical psychologist. 8. i recommend that with the aid of this report that [ms marella] get some supportive counselling with a clinical psychologist to assist her to enable some contact between [x] and [mr marella] and that the benefits of [x] having knowledge of his father and paternal family would be helpful for [x]. 9. as a way of monitoring, it would be helpful before the contact visits for a letter from the psychiatrist to attest to [mr marella's] mental stability. 10. with regard to parental responsibility i don't hold a firm view although i believe the mother would find it overwhelmingly difficult to share parental responsibility. 11. it also appears that [mr marella] had some vulnerability to stress. there are times of great stress where he seems to have withdrawn and avoided and confronting the major stresses. this suggests that he's vulnerable to highly stressful situations such as the job that he had undertaken and that he should think carefully about what form of stress or vocation he could plan for the future.
evidence of dr h – oral
if you can assume that – this is crystal balling, of course – if you can assume orders are made [x] stays with his mother and spends time with his father in accordance with one of the proposed minutes, can you tell us what the benefits to [x] of having both parents in his life in that fashion are likely to be?---well, the benefits are that [x] is able to identify with two parental figures, that he can develop a sense of security and a stronger sense of his own identity, a feeling of being loved and wanted and valued and – and not being rejected and not needing to deal with a major sense of loss and regret and potential resentment towards one or both parents if his father, for example, was not in his life. in the short term, i think, as i outlined, probably at a young age, he’s not likely to notice a great deal about day-to-day life where he’s – if he’s well-cared for by his mother and extended family, but as he matures and – and approaches puberty and then adolescence, this is likely to be a time where he’s trying to identify and develop his own identity feelings, that he is likely to have quite strong feelings of confusion. so i think if he can at least have some relationship with his father and also a stable base with his mother, then for his mental health development, that’s likely to help him a great deal. okay. now, if the court takes the view proposed by the mother that the child live with her and have no contact at all with the father, what’s the likely outcome for the child in those circumstances on a long-term basis?---so in – yes. well, i think it’s important to say in the short term there’s probably not going to be a lot of obvious, you know, that he is likely to continue to – i presume that he’s developing reasonably well despite some of his developmental issues. in the long term, then he’s going to have major questions about why his father did not want him, why his father rejected him or why his mother prevented him from having a relationship with his father and the – the loss and gap in his life of not having a father who exists but for whatever reason was prevented from having a relationship. so – and he’s going to find that extraordinarily difficult to understand, and it’s likely to create significant confusion for him as he develops further, and then it is likely to impact on how he relates to others as he gets a bit older and feelings of trust and confidence in forming relationships. so it can have quite a profound long-term impact on his life trajectory. and, doctor, it’s the case, isn’t it, that as [x] becomes older – and [x] is now going to a public school – and he meets other children who are spending time with their non-live-with father, if i can call it that, on the weekend that he will probably start asking questions about, “where’s my dad?” for example?---correct.
are you - - -?---i think in my recommendations - - - are you able to assist with that? yes?---yes. i think in my recommendation on my previous – of my report, i did anticipate that perhaps there could be some – if all being equal and all progressing well that there could be some daytime contact after a period of time, perhaps the age of seven or eight, and that that should continue, daytime contact, until perhaps the age of 10, and then there might be time that, you know – whether or not overnight contact. but i think in order to try and achieve some confidence for the mother, i did not want to anticipate or project too far into the future depending on how things might progress. but i would have thought that by the age of seven or eight that the child could tolerate some time with the father on his own as long as the situation has been stable enough well, i think [x] is seven at the moment?---seven. yes. so i would have thought – so the key - - - sorry, sir. he’s almost seven at the moment. it’s my error?---almost seven. almost seven?---okay. yes. i thought he was – i thought he was about six. yes. the – the key issue here, though, is that the mother, i believe, has either an overt or covert fear about the child being killed or somebody being murdered, and – and so she needs an opportunity to develop confidence that, you know, that fear or risk is not of significance. i understand that. and i understand that to address that, you asked the mother to attend some appropriate psychotherapy type counselling?---yes. thank you. now, doctor, there’s another proposal that could be before the court, and if the court were to find that the mother – or if the court were to find that the appropriate orders are orders for the child to live with the father, are you able to assist the court with some direction that that proposal could take, for example, if that were to happen, when the change should be, contact with the mother and the like?---well, that would obviously be extraordinarily problematic and challenging, but if that – if the court did decide that change of residence was essential, then how that’s handled and the process by which it’s handled and that transition from being with the mother learning – developing some attachment with the father and then moving into the father’s care would need to occur, and i would have thought that additional attachment figures, such as grandparents, would potentially be helpful or even aunts or other extended family to facilitate that. and it would probably need to take, you know, at least, you know, several months to be able to develop enough of a relationship with the father with regard to feeling secure and safe enough, not being overwhelmed emotionally. from what i understand, there has been no contact for at least three years, and so the child - - - that’s right?--- - - - probably has very little recall of the father. well, i think we can assume that he has next to zero recall if the mother is to be believed?---yes. ... ms karagiannis: yes. thank you, your honour. sorry, doctor?---well, this is certainly not a recommendation that i’m putting forward that there be a change of residence, you know, in these circumstances and that hopefully some middle ground can be negotiated, and it would be an extreme or worst case scenario, i would think, that the child who is cared for well presumably by his mother and extended family would need to be then placed with the father. but in trying to respond to your question, are there any circumstances in which this could occur and if the court felt that it should occur, then he would need to develop some attachment to his father and perhaps paternal extended family so that he could feel safe enough and secure enough to be able to stay with the father and then feel as though he’s not going to lose his mother and still would be able to continue a relationship with the mother. and i would have thought that that ideally could occur over a 12 month period but could possibly occur in a shorter period of time if – if that were ordered, but that would be extreme. just for the record, doctor, this proposal fell from evidence the mother gave yesterday that she would not comply with any orders the court made for [x] to spend time with his father because she felt the father posed a risk to [x], and today, with the benefit of some legal advice, the mother’s evidence has changed from that to she will do whatever the court directs her to do. so there’s some - - -?---yes. - - - middle ground there, and i just wanted to have your opinion in the event that the court were left with the former rather than the latter proposal. and i appreciate it’s a crystal ball and it’s very difficult, but what i want to specifically - - -?---yes. - - - ask you – other matters where children are removed from their long-term carer normally end up with periods when there’s no contact in order - - -?---yes. - - - to allow the child to settle down in the other household. i take it you’re not recommending something like that if the court takes that view?---well, usually it occurs in circumstances where there has been sort of active alienation that has been perpetrated by one parent against the other. i’m not sure whether that’s the case in this matter, whether the mother has deliberately denigrated and undermined the father to the child such that he has got a really negative view. if – of the father. if –if that were the case that there was extreme alienation, then there may need to be a period of time where there is – or a potential of that, there may need to be a period of time where the child has an opportunity to develop some – a strong bond and attachment to the father so that he can have the confidence to stay with her – with him and then have the ability to then reconnect with the mother. but i do – i do understand what you’re saying that usually there needs to be a period of time where there is no contact with the primary carer in – in order to enable that child to develop a strong enough relationship with the new carer. and can i just say for the record, doctor, i’m not suggesting the mother has alienated the child, nor have i put that?---no. i was just interested - - -?---no.
if you also accept from me that orders have been made for [x] to be reintroduced and spend time with his father that were largely in accordance with your recommendations but that to date the mother has refused to comply with these orders for just over about a period of a year now, would that cause you concerns about [ms bracewell’s] ability to support a relationship between [x] and his father?---it – it does raise major concerns about the mother’s ability to cope with the child having a relationship with the father, and it perhaps harks back to the concerns i had at the time, which was this almost overwhelming irrational fear of perhaps the father being a murdered and that, you know, there could be a revisiting of the family trauma that has happened. leaving aside the fact that we’ve had something of a road to damascus moment this morning, if i say to you that in that 12 months the mother has been adamant both to the court and to the experts that she has seen in the intervening period that it doesn’t matter what the court orders, she won’t comply, what concerns does that raise for you?---well, it does raise concerns that perhaps the mother is much more rigid and intransigent than it would have appeared. she’s certainly has a history of being high functioning and being able to manage, you know, critical situations well and being able to adapt. she has done an amazingly competent job caring for [x] and helping him get through cardiac surgery and having, you know, severe illness and as well as supporting him with, i think, some speech and developmental issues. so it seems to be that this is an isolated block that she has got rather than a global functioning problem, which gave me some optimism that with time and with some assistance she may be able to shift from that extreme position. if you also accept from me that it’s an agreed fact in this case that there has, in fact, been no contact of any kind between [mr marella] and [ms bracewell] for the duration of these proceedings and that there has been no police intervention or reports made by [ms bracewell] of any sort of concerning behaviour by him but the mother’s evidence is still that she considers [mr marella] a real threat to her and the child, what, if any, inferences might you be able to draw from that?---well, that would suggest to me that she has not got around her a reasonable balanced support network that can help her work through this extraordinarily difficult picture or catastrophic view that she has around [mr marella], and i suspect that the events that occurred between [mr marella] and [mr ac] and the conflict and the avos that occurred, i think, in late 2018 were very unfortunate and occurred also at a very critical time and, in fact, the catastrophic feelings around that time are quite significant for her. and although she has been diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder relating to the marriage, i think that there may be significant post-traumatic stress disorder relating to that period of time when [x] was extremely ill, needed to have cardiac surgery, his life was under threat and also [mr marella] wasn’t coping at that time, and she couldn’t manage caring for her child as well as trying to assist [mr marella]. and so i think that’s still – i’m guessing, but that still seems to be ever present in her mind, and she has not been able to shift over the last four years to where we are today, which is four years down the track, and there has been, as far as i know, no further adverse or threatening events.
...--well, it would need to be managed very well by, i think, an objective professional that he [x] could trust, perhaps a mental health professional, as well as perhaps a trusted family member that he also trusts, so that he can be assured that his relationship with his mother is not going to be lost or damaged. so that – that would need to be – and also his mother would need to be able to reassure him that he’s not losing her.
that was the next part of my question?---yes. with your very helpful comments about the mother’s ptsd, whether it’s described as a separate component of it apropos [x]'s surgery and heart issues and, secondly - - --?---yes. - - - around a similar time of the father’s mental health issues as well - - -?---it was like a perfect storm, it seemed, your honour - - - absolutely?--- - - - that these things happened. yes. would you have any suggestions – and, again, i know that it’s somewhat on the run, but, again, it’s in the light of your helpful comments – assistance and support for the mother (a) in terms of perhaps trying to deal with that extra component or aspect of ptsd and, secondly, in terms of any transitional and support arrangements for [x] starting to spend time with his dad?---well, i think that the mother would need her own individual therapy or therapist who understood what the purpose of – if your honour did order a change of residence that the mother would need to understand how she could need to manage her own mental health issues to assist [x] but also to assist herself in such a situation, and so she would – she would need that. [x], i think, would need his own individual assistance, and the father, i believe, would also benefit from having some professional assistance in order to navigate. so really all three would need, i think, individual expert psychological support, and those three professionals would also need to be able to communicate with each other to manage this process. and the grandparents, i think, also play a crucial role here. they need to be supporting. so the grandfather, maternal grandfather, [mr ac], it would be really important that he support the mother and also support [x] should the court order a change of residence so that this can be done in a constructive way. thank you. i was, in fact, focusing mainly really just on not a change in residence but simply the reintroduction of [x] spending time with his dad at a contact centre?---right, your honour. i was – i was – i was still thinking of the extreme scenario that was put to me by the - - - no. no. i understand?--- - - - independent - - - i’m trying to stay away from extremes as far as possible?---yes. yes. so even introducing time with the father, i believe that the – the – the same process would be extremely helpful for – for them. so to have the three professionals assisting in this transitional stage of introducing the father, developing relationships, but also, i think, the grandparents are key as well, particularly the maternal grandfather, who where there’s a – i think there – it appeared to me there was some intergenerational trauma there that is playing a role in this fear of, you know, potential disaster and catastrophe that needs to be managed.
and finally i have from my part – i’m sure from everyone else’s as well – is the treatment of ptsd – is that radically different, say, from other what i will call in layman’s terms supportive counselling for a reintroduction of time? is it so radically different?---yes, it’s different. it is. right?---it is different. but this – this would really need to be a dual role because it would need to be supportive counselling to assist with the anxiety but also dealing with the – the trauma at the time and trying to challenge the trauma and what – what those traumatic fears were, and i think at the time of [x]'s cardiac problems, it was uncertain as to how serious it was and whether [x], you know, may succumb. i think there was a genuine fear of risk, and fortunately it was managed well and i understand he has responded well to treatment. but i think there’s still a lot of trauma around that time, and – and that trauma, i think, has now persisted because it did translate into conflict between the parents, and then, i think, the maternal grandfather became involved unfortunately in that conflict, and it sort of perpetuated the situation from there. and so there has never been a resolution to that situation.
... --i was talking about viable residential parent, that making a sudden change that it seemed that that was an extreme change to go from being a – having no contact and no living relationship with the child to then suddenly becoming the primary carer of the child, that that seemed to be too big a quantum leap for the child to make suddenly. but in terms of the father being able to care for the child and have the innate ability, i don’t have any reservations about him having the potential ability to be a caring parent. and the other scenario of having – being able to care for the child on periods of time such as day contact or brief contact, i don’t have any concerns about the father being able to provide that. because in the paragraph above, you talked about his struggling to care for the child if he was under stress?---yes. right. and of course he isn’t capable of holding down a job, and one assumes that that’s because he can’t deal with the stress of a job. you would accept, would not you, that the stress of bringing up a child that has not – has no relationship with you would be very stressful, would not it?---it – it would be stressful, and i’m not recommending a change of residence - - -
... but if that were to happen, there’s a real possibility, isn’t it, that if [x] was removed from my client’s primary care that that could have a significant impact on her mental health, would you accept that?---correct. yes. so that’s why i’ve suggested that a change of residence would really require, you know, three experienced expert professionals to work with [x] and each of the parents.
... so i would have thought that with the appropriate supports in place and dealing with the major issues that she could cope with some contact between the child and the father as long as she is confident that she’s not going to lose the child but also that she has overcome this fear of being murdered.
...---well, it would suggest that he still can have moments where he’s feeling very stressed and has difficulty sleeping. i mean, i think one needs to look at the broader picture as well as to if he’s able to provide for a self, you know, stable residence, he’s able to maintain a stable lifestyle and – and deal with supporting himself on a day-to-day basis. and it is likely that there will be stressful periods of time, and it would then depend on whether he’s able to then, you know, develop and – or whether he has developed the skills to manage those stressful periods of time.
evidence of family consultant ms n – report
issues in dispute and issues identified during assessment 29. the issues in dispute are:
a. the division of parental responsibility. b. whether [x] will spend time with his father. c. whether [x]'s name will be placed on the awl. d. whether the mother will be required to live in [city c] with [x]. e. the name by which [x] will be known. f. whether [x] will participate in catholic sacraments. g. whether media consent will be given to [x]'s school to reproduce pictures of him.
30. the author identified the following issues:
a. the risk factors outlined above. b. [x] has not spent time with his father for more than three years c. the parenting capacity of each party. d. an ineffective co-parenting relationship between the parties.... the mother acknowledged that she has not complied with the 29 april 2021 order for [x] to begin re-establishing a relationship with his father, and stated this is because she believes that [x] would be at significant risk of harm if the order were implemented. the mother stated that nothing can be done that would enable her to feel comfortable for [x] to have any kind of relationship with his father. the mother asserted that, irrespective of whether this court makes a final order for [x] to re-establish his relationship with his father, she would not comply with such an order... the father said that, in april 2018, he was diagnosed with major depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsd), due to trauma experienced whilst he was employed as a [public servant] at [employer t]. the trauma the father experienced included clients being violent towards him, and him attending a home where there was a decomposing body. the father said that in 2018, he experienced suicide ideation, and that there was one incident in 2018, when he cut himself with a knife whilst sleepwalking. the father stated that in 2018, he was concerned that people wanted to harm him, and asserted his fear was reasonable given that some of his clients had allegedly been violent towards him. the father advised that in 2018, he attended hospital once when he was feeling “very down”, and again after, he cut himself whilst sleepwalking. the father reported that, between 18 november 2018 and 14 january 2019, he was an in-patient at the [q clinic] in sydney. the father claimed that the mental health treatment he has received has been effective, that he has not felt suicidal since 2018, and that his mental health is stable. the father said that he is currently prescribed anti-depressants, anti-anxiety medication, and sleeping tablets. the father stated that he sees his psychologist every four weeks, and that he sees his psychiatrist every six to eight weeks. the father reported the treatment he receives is helpful, and that his main ongoing symptom is that he can become overwhelmed in crowded places.
allegations of family violence the father did not identify family violence as a concern in his relationship with the mother, and stated that her behaviour has never caused him to feel unsafe. nonetheless, the father alleged that the maternal grandfather caused him to feel unsafe in november 2018, when the maternal grandfather allegedly grabbed him, yelled at him, and threatened him with a shovel in [x]'s presence. the father claimed that because of the maternal grandfather’s alleged behaviour, a provisional intervention order was issued protecting the father from the maternal grandfather. the father stated that the intervention order was not finalised because he did not have ongoing fears regarding the maternal grandfather. the mother confirmed that there was a provisional intervention order protecting the father from the maternal grandfather. the mother stated that she was not present when the alleged assault occurred, but advised that she does not believe the maternal grandfather would have assaulted the father. the mother alleged that, when the parents’ were a couple, the father psychologically abused her and threatened her. she said that the alleged abuse by the father primarily occurred through him threatening to kill her and discussing his interest in homicide. the mother alleged that the chronicity and the intensity of the father’s alleged abuse increased during their relationship. the mother stated that, usually when the father displayed this alleged behaviour, he was calm and did not display overtly agitated behaviour. the mother alleged that the father’s initial comments about killing people lacked specificity, but as she failed to react with shock to his comments, he seemed to test how much detail she could “tolerate” regarding his fantasies of committing murder. the mother described the father as “layering” her with increasing information connected to his ruminations on homicide. for example, the mother alleged that soon after the parents began cohabiting in 2012, the father threatened that, if she ever left him, then his cousins, whom he allegedly claimed were mafia members, would harm her. the mother said that, in response to the father’s alleged threat, she told him she was not concerned because she would never leave him. the mother claimed that next the father stated that he and his cousins had access to guns, and again she did not show any alarm in her reaction to him. the mother also alleged that the father told her, that he and his cousins stamped on the head of a pupil from their school when they were adolescents... the mother discussed having conflicting emotions regarding the father. the mother said that she loved the father, but also knew he was “too dangerous” to be part of their family. the mother alleged that once, the father lunged towards her in their front garden, and she became distressed because she feared someone would see his “dangerous” behaviour, and he would be removed from the family. the mother reported that [x] witnessed much of the father’s allegedly abusive behaviour... adult relationships the father and the mother each reported that they have not communicated since november 2018. collateral information family report of [dr h] (child, adult and family psychiatrist), dated 22 september 2020 [dr h] identified at paragraph three (page 2) that the parents “present as two potentially healthy individuals who could have a great deal to offer their son [x].” [dr h] did not believe that the father’s mental health presented an unacceptable risk to [x] or the mother. however, [dr h] documented that the mother is highly fearful of the father, and that the challenge is for the father’s mental health to remain stable, and for the mother to conquer her fear of the father...
evaluation this assessment considers the future living and time-spending arrangements for [x] aged 6 years who has not spent time with his father for over three years. a central concern in this matter is whether it is safe for [x] to spend time with his father. usually, it is desirable for a child to enjoy a meaningful relationship with each of their parents, save for circumstances where the risks related to a parent mean that it is unsafe for a child to spend time with a parent. key, and apparently accepted facts in this matter, seem to be that, in 2018, the father’s mental health seriously deteriorated, and that he received in-patient treatment for this issue. however, the severity of the father’s mental health concerns is contested. the father claimed that whilst his mental health issues have been significant, he has never posed a risk to [x]'s safety, and that the mother has, without justification, prevented [x] from having a relationship with him. conversely, the mother asserted that the father has chronic and pervasive mental health issues, which mean it will never be safe for [x] to have a relationship with the father. [x]'s cardiac issues suggest that he is a somewhat vulnerable child, despite this, his mother described him as an outgoing child with a range of interests. [x] is in early-middle childhood, and this is an important time when children practise skills for forming healthy social relationships, and start to formulate a clearer sense of identity. children at this stage of development usually benefit from living in a safe, nurturing and predictable environment. the current parenting arrangements whereby [x] lives with his mother, and has no contact with his paternal family is likely to impair his ability to develop a coherent sense of identity, and seems to considerably limit his ability to have an appreciation of his [country ak] heritage. the mother’s allegations regarding the father’s family violence appeared to intersect with his alleged mental health issues, and illustrate a potentially lethal pattern of coercive control that, if accurate, suggests that there is a high risk he could seriously injure [x], the mother, or someone else within her family. it is greatly concerning that, the mother remains extremely fearful of the father, and that she has taken major steps to protect her and [x] from him. if accepted, the mother’s narratives of the father’s alleged family violence and mental health issues, suggest that [x] has suffered significant psychological distress due to exposure to the father’s alleged family violence and mental health issues. if the father’s allegation is correct that the mother has fabricated allegations of family violence and has an irrational fear of him, this may indicate that she struggles to differentiate between her needs and those of [x]. plainly, as the father asserts, the mother and her family may have a predisposition to fearing that he could commit homicide, due to her paternal grandfather murdering her paternal grandmother. notwithstanding, the mother denied that this has any bearing on her concerns regarding the father. the mother denied the father’s allegations that she has smacked [x] with excessive force, however, she admitted that when the parents were a couple, she occasionally smacked him. if the father’s allegation is accurate, the alleged behaviour of the mother may have had a detrimental effect upon [x]'s ability to enjoy a trusting relationship with her. if, as the mother claimed, she only occasionally smacked [x], and this was not with force, her behaviour is unlikely to have caused [x] significant harm. the father acknowledged that he has experienced depression and suicide ideation, and that in 2018, when there was a substantial deterioration in his mental health, this impaired his ability to focus on and meet [x]'s needs. nonetheless, the father claimed that, currently, his mental health is stable, and that there is no risk to [x] in his care. at interview, there was no overt information to indicate that the father is currently experiencing an acute mental illness. whilst the mother denied the father’s suggestion, that she has an undiagnosed mental health issue. during this assessment, she disclosed finding it stressful discussing the alleged family violence of the father and simultaneously cried as this occurred. the mother also reported that when she is stressed, it becomes harder to manage her diabetes. it is not uncommon for people who have been subjected to family violence to encounter a decline in their mental health. the mother’s accounts and presentation indicates that any contact with the father or the paternal family is likely to cause her considerable mental anguish, and may reduce her ability manage her diabetes effectively. in such circumstances, her capacity to meet [x]'s needs would also probably be significantly impaired. the father denied the mother’s allegation that he has abused prescription medication, therefore, this will be a matter for evidence. if the father has engaged in this behaviour, it is likely to have contributed to the broader problems he has experienced with regard to his mental health issues. the father and the mother have an ineffective co-parenting relationship, and they have not communicated since 2018. whilst it seems that the father would like to co-parent with the mother, currently the mother appears unable to co-parent with him due to her extreme fear of him. the father’s proposal that [x] is reintroduced to him, and that [x] ultimately spends unsupervised with him, seems to be based on the father’s wish for [x] to have a relationship with him, and for [x] to enjoy participating in the paternal family’s [country ak] traditions. an advantage of this proposal is that it is likely to facilitate [x] developing a clearer sense of identity and belonging. a disadvantage is that [x] may find reintroduction to his father, confusing and unsettling after having no contact with him for over three years. there is also a concern that [x] would not enjoy contact with the father, due to the mother either sharing directly or indirectly her fears about the father with [x]. another drawback is that the mother’s narratives suggest that any contact between [x] and the father would cause her distress and potentially impair her ability care for x. the mother’s proposal, that [x] has no contact with his father appears founded on her desire to ensure [x]'s safety. if the court makes such an order, [x] will probably be protected from any risk that the father poses to him. a disadvantage of this proposal is that it deprives [x] of the opportunity of having a relationship with potentially two loving parents. another drawback is that it may create difficulties for [x] in having a sense of pride and appreciation of his [country ak] heritage. it is possible that, if implemented as [x] matures, he may resent his mother for failing to allow him to have a relationship with his father. information gathered in this report indicates that his mental health issues have historically impaired the father’s parenting. the main contested issue in this matter is whether the father poses such a risk to [x] that it is unsafe for them to spend time together. even if this court considered that the father does not present a substantial risk of harm to [x], and another order were made for [x] to be reintroduced to the father, it is doubtful whether the mother would have the capacity to comply with such an order. if the mother complied with such an order, it is questionable whether [x]'s reintroduction to the father would be a positive experience for [x], since the mother is likely to struggle to ensure that [x] is not exposed to her fears regarding the father. whilst the reintroduction is occurring, it appears that the mother would likely experience distress and this could destabilise her diabetes, and detract her from focusing on [x]'s needs. alternatively, the court could consider a change of residence for [x], and place [x] in the father’s care. an advantage of this proposal is that it would likely facilitate [x] beginning to re-establish a relationship with his father and paternal family. a disadvantage of this proposal is that [x] is likely to find the implementation of this distressing and unsettling, since he probably has no memory of his father and the paternal family. there is also a concern that, if implemented, the stress caused to [x] may have negative ramifications for his cardiac condition. on balance, it appears that there are more risks associated with reintroducing [x] to his father, than there are with [x] not having a relationship with his father. accordingly, it is considered to be in [x]'s best interests to live with his mother have no contact with his father and paternal family. in view of this, it is considered to be in [x]'s best interests for the mother to have sole parental responsibility of [x], including decisions regarding where [x] will reside, whether [x] participates in catholic sacraments, overseas travel and media consent. whether the [x] and the father have some form of written communication is a complicated issue. ideally, it would be preferable for there to be a mode through which this could occur, so that, in the future, perhaps when [x] is an adult, he has a means of contacting his father. notwithstanding, the author’s discussions with the mother did not identify a safe means through which this could occur. similarly, it would be preferable for the father to receive information regarding [x]'s welfare as a way of reassuring him that [x] is safe. unfortunately, again the mother was unable to identify a method through which this could occur, that would allow her to feel safe. therefore, in this matter, it might not be viable for there to be any communication between [x] and the father, or for him to receive information regarding [x]'s welfare. the mother sought for [x]'s name to be changed to “[x bracewell]”, the father opposed the mother’s proposal. whilst it is beyond the scope of this assessment to make a recommendation on this issue, it is noted that maintaining the father’s last name or even his middle name of “[mr marella]” may assist [x] to feel connected to his father and the paternal family if he chooses to reconnect with them as an adult. recommendations 82. unless evidence suggests otherwise, it is respectfully recommended that: the mother has sole parental responsibility of [x]. [x] lives with his mother. [x] has no contact or communication with his father and paternal family.
evidence of ms n – oral
you give the opinion at paragraph 70 that the current parenting arrangements whereby [x] lives with his mother and has no contact with his paternal family is likely to impair his ability to develop a coherent sense of identity. can you tell his honour a bit more about what you mean by impairing his ability to develop a coherent sense of identity?---well, clearly [x] has two parents – comes from two parents. and his father is of [country ak] heritage, and usually it’s helpful for children to have an understanding of both sides of their parents to maybe understand where different traits come, different parts of their personality, that type of thing. it’s usually – the problem is that if he has no time with his father and no relationship with his paternal family then he – it’s likely that he will be missing out on understanding his heritage completely. he will just – he will mainly have an australian sense of his heritage and he may, particularly as he gets to teen years, wonder about different aspects of his character and his heritage and where that comes from.
in making the recommendation that there are more risks associated with reintroducing [x] to his father than there are with [x] not having a stable relationship with his father it’s possible, isn’t it, that the fears that the mother has simply might not be reasonable?---yes.
and so how did that factor into your assessment of risk, that it would be too great a risk to reintroduce him to his father?---my risk assessment was – the mother came across as overwhelmingly fearful of the father and my concern was that there had been an order in place for some time for a reintroduction, she had failed to comply with that. during her interview she – whether or not it was reasonable or not, she provided a very detailed description of her fear regarding the father, and my concern was that – first of all, if an order was made, i was concerned that she, for whatever reason, had no capacity to comply with it. and even if she did comply with it, whether or not her allegations against the father were truthful or not, she appeared to believe them to such a great extent that i was worried that that would actually impair her ability to care for [x] and she – it – it appeared, in these circumstances, that she would continue being his primary carer and that either intentionally or unintentionally she could end up sabotaging any attempts for a reintroduction. those were my concerns. so in making that recommendation, there’s nothing in your report where you take into account any steps the mother might take to get past her fears if they are, in fact, unreasonable, is there?---there – there is not, but within [dr h’s] assessment he – he made some recommendations regarding that, and i believe that she did – there were some attempts to get – for her to engage in that, unless it was unsuccessful.
ms haughton: yes. just in relation to the question you were just asked about in the event the mother says she will comply with the orders your recommendation is that [x] spend time with him – his father as recommended by [dr h]. you understand, don’t you, that in cases such as this it can be clear that the – to a person that if they don’t comply with an order they may lose the primary care of the child?---i – i’m aware that that could happen. yes. and so if the mother took the view that she felt that she was – well, i withdraw that. if the mother isn’t committed to that relationship starting again and developing, then it is just as possible, isn’t it, that the disadvantages that you refer to in paragraph 78 of your report could well turn out to be the case?---yes. and so surely her saying, “i will comply with an order”, without any underlying evidence as to whether or – it’s a voluntary – that she’s prepared to do that on a voluntary basis or out of fear of losing [x], you would agree, would not you, that if it’s – if she feels that she has been coerced or that she had no choice then that could impact negatively on [x]?---yes. and in that case, it – you would agree that it could impact on her parenting?---yes. and so you would agree then, that in those circumstances – the circumstances of your – and haven’t really changed. you’re saying the disadvantages of the child being reintroduced to his dad are not outweighed by the risk if the mother is unable to support that relationship, then that’s still the situation, isn’t it?---i think it – you’re – yes. if she’s coerced into it - - - and so – so if, in fact, the mother cannot commit to that relationship developing, then your recommendation would be that – that [x] doesn’t spend time with his father, that’s your case, isn’t it?---i think there are different shades of compliance. if the – if the mother is, at least, trying and making some effort i think that’s a very different circumstance for a situation where she is petrified and she has no capacity to control her fears of the father and what the father – and what she fears the father may do around [x], to somebody who is – who has – who has more control over their emotions and is, to some degree, able to protect. i – i don’t think it’s – my fear is – my concern is that if she was – during the interview with me she presented as highly fearful of the father, and it appeared to me that given her narrative that she would be unable to provide protection regarding her fears of the father to [x]. however, if things have changed for her and she is able to provide some degree of protection to [x] regarding her fears then i think that that’s a different matter.
evidence of psychologist ms k – report
3. education history 3.1 [ms marella] completed year 10 before undertaking an apprenticeship in [a trade]. she was guarded in relation to her performance, repeatedly stating “i did my best” and “i was happy with my grades” when pressed for more specific information. [ms marella] appeared to have difficulty admitting to deviations from the quite idealised view of herself and her life, this attitude was also alluded to in [dr h’s] report. she did admit some remedial assistance during primary school “to catch up because i missed so much school with being sick.” 5. relationship history 5.1 [ms marella] began dating at 17 years of age and her first significant relationship [with [mr marella]] commenced at that same age. she met her first partner through a “school friend” and described having an increased sense of trust of her partner as a result her trust in her friend. [ms marella] reported that at the time she felt “old” to have only just started dating and that she “just wanted to spoil someone.” 5.3 [ms marella] recalled one occasion where her former partner was holding his hands “like this [simulated hands around a cup/neck] and he said ‘i wonder what it's like to kill someone?’ looking into his hands.” when asked why she did not leave the relationship at this point, [ms marella] became emotional as she said “i thought if people knew they’d take him off me. i did not see divorce as an option. i’d planned to be so loyal.” 5.5 when asked why she went ahead with the wedding, [ms marella] said “i did not consider not marrying him. i thought ‘i can be everything for him, i can love him and support him.’ i wanted what my parents have. i wanted my first boyfriend to be my everything. we even got married in the same church as my parents did.” 5.8 [ms marella's] description of the relationship with her husband suggests a pattern of ‘emotional testing’ that can create an intense sense of intimacy quite quickly. her description of being given the opportunity to enter into another person’s most private beliefs and thoughts, combined with her idealised intentions around a relationship, make for a particularly vulnerable combination. in effect, [ms marella] had decided the course and outcome of her relationship prior to meeting her husband and she fiercely maintained her vision despite indications for concern. she described fearing that her idealised relationship would be “taken off me,” demonstrating rigid and fantastical thinking that may refer to underlying attachment issues. 6. health history 6.1 [ms marella] was diagnosed with type i diabetes at eight years of age and spent one week in hospital, followed by “a few months of feeling less than 100%.” she described her response to the diagnosis as being “accepting and solution-focused.” [ms marella] confirmed that her diabetes symptoms were “becoming more under control with being more settled.” 6.2 it is noted that [dr h] described [ms marella's] diabetes as “well-managed,” however hospital notes around [x]'s birth suggest this was not the case. additionally, [ms marella] acknowledged that her symptoms fluctuate and require significant attention from her on a daily basis, hence her inability to maintain employment. it is not doubted that [ms marella] appropriately applies her efforts in managing her condition, more that her diabetes is variable and requires significant flexibility and attention. diabetes symptoms are impacted by stress and this will require some consideration in any contact between [ms marella] and [x]'s father. 8. psychological assessment trauma symptoms 8.2 the essential feature of acute stress disorder (asd) or posttraumatic stress disorder (ptsd) is the development of characteristic symptoms following exposure to an extreme traumatic stressor. symptoms usually begin within the first three months after the trauma, although there may be a delay of months, even years before symptoms appear. 8.4 [ms marella] described being “pretty certain he [[mr marella]] was coming to kill us. i was too scared to go outside while we were in hiding.” she based these fears on her recollection of comments made to her by [mr marella], her knowledge that he had access to a firearm and her experience of her husband as being unpredictable. 8.5 [ms marella] confirmed experiencing intrusive and distressing memories “only when i have to do court paperwork.” at these times, [ms marella] remembers both “old and new things” and reported being “more surprised that i forgot they happened” than distressed. [ms marella] described “fully replaying” these past events “like watching a movie.” 8.6 when asked about how she dealt with the emotions surrounding these events, [ms marella] reported “i question it and tell my family about it.” asked why she did this, [ms marella] confirmed that “i try not to get carried away with it, i try to stay present.” she denied any re-experiencing of emotions at these times through this cognitive avoidance technique “otherwise i’d drop everything.” 8.8 [ms marella] reported having “readjusted the whole house,” including the “paint colour” and “cutlery” to “remove the memories” of [mr marella]. she described a persistent sense of fear of [mr marella] that has led her to “go into hiding” with her son. 8.9 the reports from [ms marella] indicate that she meets criteria for 309.81 posttraumatic stress disorder as a result of her experiences in her marriage. psychological history 8.10 [ms marella] denied ever experiencing symptoms of anxiety prior to her marriage. she described some low mood around “[x]'s surgery was super hard.” [ms marella] recalled that around this time she “did not want to listen to music” and she was drawn to imagery of strength. although “i don’t’ like that now, i’m happy and willing to be vulnerable again.” 8.12 asked about her decision to “go into hiding,” [ms marella] recalled thinking “i have to look after [x] and his mother.” she recalled that this was a “knee-jerk reaction” due to fear of her husband “and his family, especially around court dates.” [ms marella] stated that she has increased security at her home and “stopped hiding last year because [x] needs to be near family.” she remained in contact with her medical professionals and police “they’d tell me when [mr marella] was in town.” 8.13 [ms marella] noted that “[x] was vomiting twice a day before [mr marella] left, now he doesn’t do it at all.” she also recalled “sleeping with [x] for quite some time, i was so scared [mr marella] would find us and kill us.” [ms marella] maintains a “safety plan” should she feel under threat. she noted “i still have all of [mr marella's] things here, i don’t know what to do with them because i don’t want to do anything that would upset him.” cognitive functioning 8.15 during discussion with [ms marella], it became apparent that her comprehension was somewhat limited as questions required modification. this was further confirmed when psychological testing was attempted and then aborted due to [ms marella's] difficulty comprehending and processing the questions (which required a year 10 reading level). in reading [ms marella's] affidavit of 25 january 2021, which she stated she had completed herself, it became clear that [ms marella] has greater difficulty than she admits in terms of processing, organising and communication of information as well as literacy. 8.16 when questioned her about her academic performance, [ms marella] exhibited a similar response to that noted in icl documentation where she ceased communication. given her observed difficulty in processing information quickly and/or in front of others, it is unsurprising that [ms marella] is unable to provide satisfactory responses when under pressure. 8.17 an attempt was made to undertake cognitive assessment of [ms marella] while she was in canberra some days after this interview, however [ms marella] did not make contact for this arrangement, despite repeated communication between the icl and [ms marella's] representative. it is noted that when additional testing was suggested to [ms marella], she stated that she would be averse to “being in a room doing testing while my son is in a different room.” she appeared unable to consider that there may be another adult with her during the “eight hour round trip” for her son to attend his specialist appointment in canberra. when pressed, [ms marella] was unable to state whether she would attend overnight for the appointment in canberra or attend unsupported. she seemed particularly concerned that [mr marella] would inexplicably be at the office at the same time. 8.18 [ms marella's] response reinforced concerns around her information processing capabilities, rigid thinking patterns and hypervigilance in relation to [mr marella]. this combination of [ms marella's] suspected cognitive difficulties and her trauma response are likely impacting her ability to engage with court orders and negotiations.
9. summary and conclusion 9.1 [ms marella] presented as an agreeable and pleasant young woman who has experienced little control over the functioning of her body throughout her life. this began with a juvenile diagnosis of diabetes, she was then unable to continue in her chosen trade soon after qualifying due to injury and later experienced a traumatic birth of her son. despite this, [ms marella] was noted both during this assessment and the family report by [dr h] to have a particularly idealistic view of her life and circumstances. 9.2 however, when [ms marella] was asked to provide more specific information about her experiences, she demonstrated considerable guardedness and defensiveness. during this assessment it was noted that [ms marella] held particularly idealistic views about her academic and relationship functioning which do not equate with reality. not only is [ms marella] suspected of challenges in her cognitive functioning, but there is also some indication of interruption to her attachment identity. given the evident mismatch between [ms marella's] presentation of her academic functioning against reality, this raises some concerns about what may be underlying her idealistic view of her early life. 9.3 [ms marella] has developed rigid and idealistic thinking patterns that no doubt assist her in avoiding unpleasant emotional experiences. while this may have been a necessary coping strategy for a young girl confronted with a serious and permanent medical condition, it appears to be interfering with her ability to make adaptations in regard to her son’s potential needs. there is no doubt that [ms marella] believes she is acting in a protective manner for her son and herself by refusing the development of a relationship between father and son. her accounts of [mr marella] during their marriage would reasonably raise significant cause for concern in terms of physical and emotional safety for [x]. 9.4 a significant difficulty for [ms marella] appears to be consideration of alternative scenarios, including [mr marella's] assertion that his concerning behaviours were symptomatic of an active psychological condition which may now be in remission. this difficulty likely arises from [mr marella's] noted information processing challenges, rigid/concrete thinking patterns (often associated with comprehension issues) and trauma memory avoidance. it is highly likely that [ms marella's] resistance to variation is due to deep-seated fear, despite her claims about being “willing to be vulnerable.” 9.4 in terms of her ability to care for [x], i hold no serious concerns that [ms marella] is able to meet her son’s needs. she exhibits protective behaviours for him and he is by all reports a healthy and adjusted young boy. although there is some concern that [ms marella] may model her maladaptive coping strategy for her son, it is a ‘potentially problematic’ system rather than a ‘damaging’ one.
evidence of ms k – oral
yes. did she say anything directly to you about that issue about whether or not she would comply?--- [ms bracewell] is adamant that [x] having any contact with his father, and indeed herself having any contact with [x]'s father, would put them both at significant risk of harm. if you – thank you. if you accept from me that on her first day in the witness box she remained adamant, as you say, that she would not comply, and she even said to the judge “i know you won’t let that happen, no sane person would”. but then on the second day that she was in the witness box after the benefit of some legal advice, she said “i’ll comply with court orders” and repeated that, as you indicated earlier, as something of a mantra. “i’ll comply with the orders”. if you take from me that that’s what has occurred so far in these proceedings, from your assessment of [ms bracewell], did you form the impression that she would actually be capable of complying with the orders to facilitate time between [x] and his dad?---yes. would that be only if she received some kind of support, or would it be if it was ordered to start tomorrow?---i think [ms bracewell] has shown that she’s willing to comply with court orders in terms of making appointments, etcetera, and going to court-ordered psychological sessions, etcetera. so i believe she would start the enrolment process at least. i think that if there was any concern from [x] that [ms bracewell] might then have some issues in continuing to comply.
his honour: just before i call on ms haughton, could i just put something hopefully not completely left field to you. the court heard evidence yesterday from [dr h], and one of the comments that he made was to the effect, and i’m happy to be corrected by those at the bar table if i put it inaccurately or erroneously, that amongst other causes of the mother’s ptsd was the trauma surrounding [x]'s heart condition and surgery when he was much younger. and he described the circumstances of the surgery and other things as a perfect storm. could it be the case that the mother is thus far, subject to what dr leslie has just put to you, where the mother said just very recently that she will comply with orders, but up until that point, could the mother’s – for want of a better description – intransigence – about any time between [x] and the father – be causally related to some form of ptsd relating to [x]'s heart condition, surgery, etcetera. and simply by virtue of [x] being present constantly in her life, it’s almost like a constant reinforcement of that ptsd. i know that’s a very long-winded question, but does that make sense – or, sorry, if you’re able to make any comment?---i think that not just [x]'s heart surgery but also his birth would have created for [ms bracewell] the idea that it is possible that her son could be at risk. so the traumatic birth and then two years later the heart condition would have confirmed that there are things outside of her control that can harm her son, and it may have made her more hyper-vigilant, for want of a better term, to potential risks for her son. right. thank you. and i think my only other question, certainly at this stage, is that going back to the paragraph that you were taken to when you reported 9.2, about the mother’s academic and relationship functioning, would you likewise agree – sorry, let me start again. but still with reference to this paragraph. [dr h] described the mother yesterday as otherwise high functioning. would you also generally agree with that assessment?---high functioning in terms of which domain? it was just as i recall it, as i understood it, it was just otherwise across the board, that she was high functioning – a high functioning person – you know, she’s a can-do mother who just gets on with things. and accepting that doesn’t apply in relation to matters in relation to the father?---definitely the can-do and getting on with things, yes.
submissions on behalf of the applicant
orders sought by the father at the outset of the final hearing the father tendered a copy of an open offer of settlement he made to the mother on 2 may 2022. the orders set out in that offer were what he sought at trial. in effect those orders included sole parental responsibility to the mother but that she was to keep him informed of key information and the father be permitted to obtain information from medical professionals and schools, that [x] live with his mother and that there be a gradual introduction of time with his father, with such time culminating in [x] spending every second weekend and half school holidays with his father. the father sought that final orders be made but included a self-executing provision that if the mother continued to not comply with the orders that there be a change of residence. various therapeutic interventions were also sought. in addition to having participated in the trial itself, the father has now had the opportunity to hear what his honour raised at the conclusion of the primary evidence regarding interim orders being a potential option to consider, and what counsel for the independent children’s lawyer communicated to the court at the conclusion of the last day of the hearing, to the effect that due to the continued concerns regarding non-compliance that the icl was minded to propose interim orders, and would draft these and circulate them to the parties. the father has now had the opportunity to review the orders proposed by the icl, initially provided on 8 june 2022, and amended in some minor ways in the written submissions filed on behalf of the icl on 23 june 2022. this being the case, the father adopts the orders sought by the icl as set out in the written submissions of 23 june 2022. he is willing to agree to interim orders to provide the mother with one, final, opportunity to demonstrate to him and to the court that she can and will comply with court orders as she has indicated in her oral evidence that she will do. if the orders have not been substantially complied with by the time that the matter returns to court, then on that occasion the father will be seeking an immediate change of residence rather than a gradual introduction or a self-executing clause. submissions the father adopts the written submissions made on behalf of the independent children’s lawyer supporting the orders proposed by her. the father also relied at trial on a case outline document filed on 2 may 2022 and does not seek to substantially repeat the arguments made therein, there having been no significant change of position or evidence since that document was filed. in short, the father contends: the mother has failed to establish that the father poses an unacceptable risk of harm to [x], the mother has failed to establish that the father poses a risk of harm to her or her extended family, the mother has failed to establish that the paternal family poses any risk of harm to [x] or herself, the mother has failed to establish that her mental health is such that she could not manage to parent [x] appropriately if he was also spending time with his father in accordance with the orders sought by the father and the icl, the evidence of the experts supports the proposition that there is a benefit to [x] in having a meaningful relationship with his father, the evidence supports the proposition that if time with the father can be supported by the mother that it is in [x]'s best interests to remain living with the mother, [x] does not presently have a relationship with his father so there needs to be a process of supported and gradual reintroduction for the time to be most likely to be successful, a reintroduction process largely consistent with the recommendations made by [dr h] (and the current orders but updated to take into account the passage of time) is most likely to be in [x]'s best interests and this therefore forms the basis of the orders sought by the father and the icl, the prospects of the mother being able to facilitate a relationship between [x] and his father are greater if she would be willing to engage in some psychological support for herself, but that it would be counter-productive for her to be ordered to do so if she does not genuinely wish to participate, despite the father’s hope otherwise, the parties do not communicate and appear at least in the immediate term to remain unable to do so. in those circumstances the parties cannot communicate sufficiently well for equal shared parental responsibility to be in [x]'s best interests, that notwithstanding the likelihood that an order will be made that the mother have sole parental responsibility for [x], that it remains in [x]'s best interests for the father to be able to access information in relation to his health and education, and that there is no evidence to support the mother’s application that she should be permitted to change [x]'s name, or that he should be able to refer to himself by a name of his choosing. the balance of these submissions will address the key aspects of the evidence at trial that support the orders the father and the icl seek on an interim basis. the father’s evidence the father gave evidence in a forthright and open manner. he was upfront in both his affidavit material and in his oral evidence about the mental health issues he has experienced in the past and his ongoing management of these. the father has a history of consistent and pro-active help-seeking behaviours. he was not successfully challenged on his evidence that he has not engaged in the family violence behaviours attributed to him by the mother. he admitted, again in his affidavit material and in oral evidence, that during an incident of mental ill-health during the relationship he had hurt himself with a butter-knife, and that he had at around the time of separation experienced some suicidal ideation. he consistently denied harming or threatening to harm the mother or [x]. the material produced by the nsw police demonstrated that the father has never been charged with any violent offence, that there is no report of him having attended the former matrimonial home or [x]'s school, despite him knowing the whereabouts of these, and that the police refused to make an application for a further advo on the mothers behalf. [dr o], the father’s psychiatrist submitted an affidavit annexing reports he had prepared during his time treating the father and also gave oral evidence. his oral evidence was consistent with his written reports and was to the effect that his treatment of the father was ongoing but that he considered his mental health to be “quite stable” and was in “full remission.” this evidence was not successfully challenged in cross examination. the paternal grandparents each also gave evidence. their evidence was to the effect that they loved and missed their grandson. they were aware of the mental health history of their son. they supported him and would continue to support him both on a personal and financial level and in relation to facilitating him spending time with [x] at their home and acting as supervisors if required. they presented as supportive of [x]'s relationship with his mother, were not derogatory or even angry with the mother, they simply wanted [x] to have the opportunity to also have a relationship with his father and paternal family. the mother’s evidence it was an agreed fact heading into the final hearing that the mother had consistently refused to comply with orders of the court that required her to facilitate [x] spending time with his father. her position in her material and as conveyed by her to the experts that she was interviewed by was that it did not matter what orders the court made going forward that she had no intention of facilitating such time and would not comply. this is a position she upheld under cross examination on the first day of trial and when asked questions by his honour. at the conclusion of the first day his honour asked whether there may be a need to caution to the mother in relation to her position and leave was provided for her to discuss this issue with her legal representatives. the mother amended her position on the second day of giving evidence, thereafter saying that she would do as the court ordered. despite the evidence of the successful management of the father’s mental health in the three years post separation, and admitting that the father had not approached her or [x], her home or the school post separation, the mother maintained her position that the father posed a risk of serious harm to her and to [x]. she did not accept the proposition that she had continued to make up new allegations, including the allegation of sexual assault that she made for the first time in evidence to [ms n] or the report that the father had told her he wanted to have children to harvest their organs, instead asserting that she was remembering events that she had not previously recollected. it is submitted that a more likely explanation is that having seen that her previous allegations were not sufficient to induce the court to make orders preventing [x] from spending time with his father, the mother then sought in this round of evidence to escalate the allegations in the hope that these may now be sufficient to result in the orders she desired. the mother made a number of concerning claims during her oral evidence which included: that it was still her evidence that [mr marella] never cared for [x], that the paternal grandparents do not love [x] and that they never did, that the concern for [x] that the father and the paternal grandparents are showing is all an act, that the paternal grandparents’ offers to provide family support to [mr marella] were not genuine and that “them in the box, they flat out lied to ya”, that she would not accept the opinion of “paid experts” and that they were “not going to change [her] opinion, i’m the most important”, she did not accept the evidence of [dr o] that the father was now in remission because during the relationship “he said he was going to kill me”, that she cannot think of anything positive to say to [x] about his father because there wasn’t anything positive to say. despite her position on day 2 that she would, despite her earlier affidavit and oral evidence, comply with court orders, it is submitted that the mother does not in any way support [x] having a relationship with his father and the court could not be satisfied that she would take steps to encourage the relationship. the mother did not disclose several significant issues in her affidavit material. she did not inform the court that she was pregnant. she would not inform the court of any information regarding the father of the child. she initially refused to tell the court which extra-curricular activities that [x] was involved in, and only did so at his honour’s request. the interim orders for time to commence which had been in place since 29 april 2021 remained in place following the conclusion of the evidence of the parties on 6 may 2022 (noting that there was further evidence by [ms n] taken on 1 june 2022) and remain in place as at the present date. the mother’s commitment to compliance with the orders and the genuineness of her change of heart will ultimately be measured by her actions. it is submitted that she would have complied with the orders in the intervening period between the conclusion of her evidence on 6 may 2022 and the present time in late july, some 10 weeks, if she have any genuine intention of doing so. it will be a matter of evidence as to whether she has done so, and, if the further interim orders sought by the icl and the father are made, whether she does so before the matter returns to court. despite being involved in several key incidents at the time of separation, participating in interviews with [dr h] in 2020, and the mother’s evidence that he remains an important source of support to her and [x], the maternal grandfather [mr ac] did not go on affidavit for the final hearing and was not called as a witness. it is submitted that the court can draw the inference that any evidence he would have given would not have supported the mother’s case. on day 2 of the trial his honour suggested that the mother file an additional short affidavit setting out what she thought might assist to support her and support [x] with the introduction of time with his father. this did not occur. the oral evidence she gave in response to that question was that there be no communication between herself and the father and that time always occur in a contact centre. it is submitted that this too demonstrated an unwillingness to countenance the fact that a relationship with his father might be good for [x] or that her view of the father’s risk may not be accurate. the expert evidence [dr h] completed a comprehensive family report in september 2020. for financial reasons [dr h] was not engaged to prepare the updated family report, which was ultimately prepared by [ms n], but [dr h] was made aware of what had occurred following the release of his report, namely that interim orders for a reintroduction of [x] to his father and a progression of time had been made largely in accordance with his recommendations but that the mother had refused to comply with them, and that the father had continued with obtaining support for his mental health and that the evidence was that this had stabilised and was well-managed. [dr h’s] assessment was that the father did not pose an unacceptable risk of harm to [x] or the mother which was why his recommendations were that time should commence. his evidence in his report, which he expanded on in oral evidence, was that ideally [x] would benefit from having a relationship with his father if it could be facilitated as children who do not have one parent in their lives often wonder why this is so, whether they were “not wanted” by that parent and why that might be so, and that this has flow on effects for their sense of self and identity, especially in adolescence. in recognition of the fact that there had been no time since separation he recommended that time be gradual and involve supported re-introduction. these are the type of orders made by the court in april 2021 and remain the type of orders sought by the icl and the father. [ms k] prepared and submitted a psychological assessment of the mother in april 2022. the mother did not comply with requests by [ms k] to undergo further testing or to attend a further appointment. [ms k] indicated that this meant that her report was therefore “incomplete.” it is submitted that this may have an impact on the weight to be given to [ms k’s] report but, absent the additional information that would have been provided by the mother, it cannot be asserted with any specificity what that impact may have been. it is submitted that what can be accepted is that the mother’s failure to comply with the reasonable requests of [ms k], when taken with her refusal to comply with court orders and a dogmatic approach to what information she was willing to provide to the court and her insistence that she alone would determine what was relevant to the proceedings and how she would engage with them, is part of a pattern of behaviour by the mother that shows her disdain for the court and for any opinions other than her own. there is no genuine attempt by the mother to “work out” what arrangements might be in [x]'s best interests, or consider varying viewpoints. she has determined herself what the arrangements should be and will not take advice, expert or otherwise, in relation to this. despite her late-breaking evidence to the contrary, this attitude does not bode well for her compliance with any further interim orders that may be made in this matter. the father hopes, for [x]'s sake, that the mother is willing to change her position in this regard. [ms k’s] evidence both in her report and confirmed in oral evidence was that while she considered [ms bracewell] to meet the diagnostic criteria for ptsd that she considered her to be capable of complying with court orders to facilitate time, but that she would benefit from some psychological support to assist her in doing so. [ms n] prepared an updated family report in february 2022 and gave evidence on 1 june 2022. while the recommendation in her report was that because of the mother’s firmly held position regarding not facilitating time (regardless of orders) that she would “likely experience distress” if compelled to do so, and as such this on balance that it “appears that there are more risks associated with reintroducing [x] to his father, than there are with [x] not having a relationship with his father” she acknowledged that at the time she made her recommendations she had not been made aware by the mother that the father knew where she was living (since it is the former matrimonial home) or that he knew where [x] was attending school, or that he had still made no attempt to approach either of them. [ms n] also acknowledged that her recommendations were predicated on the mother’s firm position that it did not matter what was ordered that she would not comply, and that the situation now appeared to be different. it was put to her that she made certain assumptions about risks associated with [x]'s heart condition and the mother’s diabetes that she had no medical evidence available to her to support, and she conceded that these comments in her report were based on what she had been told by the parents and not any medical evidence. given the fact that [ms n] did not have the benefit of seeing the parties or other experts under cross-examination, was not privy to all of the information available to the court, and made reasonable concessions when such information was put to her, the court could not place much weight on her recommendation other than to say that it is necessary to balance the competing risks in the matter, a position that is readily conceded by all involved. conclusion the father is realistic. he acknowledges that the mother has not had any real change of heart in relation to accepting the importance and benefits of [x] having a relationship with him. nevertheless, the father is hopeful that should orders be made for the introduction of time that the mother will, regardless of her own views, comply with the orders and allow [x] to develop a relationship with his father.
ongoing failure to comply with orders by the mother the orders of 1 june 2022 provide at order 4 that on “...10 august 2022 the respondent file written submissions of no more than 10 pages.” submissions were not filed and served on 10 august. the father ultimately received the respondent mother’s written submissions by email at 7:23pm on 15 august. there was no explanation for the failure to comply with this order. the respondent mother also fails to comply with the order in relation to the 10 page limit. there is no explanation for this either. the respondent has also failed to comply with the property orders made by the court on 6 may by consent. the father’s solicitor has now sought that the matter be relisted to deal with this further failure to comply with orders. it is clear from the mother’s submissions that despite the interim “time with” orders remaining in place following the hearing and remaining in place to date, she does not intend to comply with those orders. duress (mother’s submissions paras 20, 22) it is the case that the matter was stood down during the mother’s cross examination so that she could obtain legal advice, and that upon returning to give evidence the mother changed her position. she suddenly expressed a willingness to comply with orders after having declared the opposite. this significantly influenced both the course of her cross examination, the cross examination of the expert, and the positions ultimately taken by the parties in relation to the orders sought. the mother’s submissions now allege and appear to give evidence that the mother feels that she was subjected to duress. this is a very serious allegation. it is an allegation striking at the core of the professional responsibilities of those representing her. it is unclear who the mother asserts subjected her to this duress: her solicitor, counsel or the court. it is unclear what is said to constitute the duress which is a legal concept beyond an abstract idea of the pressure all litigants necessarily feel in an adversarial process. given that at least the first 10 pages of the mother’s submissions appear to have been prepared by counsel (the author of the final two pages is unclear), it is unlikely that counsel is saying that she herself or the mother’s solicitor placed the mother under duress. the allegation therefore can only be that the court has placed the mother in this position. not only is this a serious allegation, but it is one that needed to be put squarely before the court prior to the conclusion of the hearing itself – especially given there was a gap of 4.5 weeks between the conclusion of the mother’s evidence and the cross examination of the court child expert. the mother was legally represented on each occasion the matter came back before the court and no application was made. the suggestion presented in the mother’s submissions can only be characterised as an inappropriate ambush. to say now in submissions, in effect, “i said i would comply with the orders, but i was under duress so you should not accept this evidence” is unacceptable, but means that the mother is now seeking to give fresh evidence in submissions. this is improper, it is procedurally unfair, and it strikes at the heart of the integrity of the process in which the parties are engaged. if the mother’s position is now that she recants her evidence, that she alleges that she was placed by the court in a position where she was forced to give that evidence, then the court cannot safely make orders – interim or final - in these circumstances until that claim is properly evidenced and cross-examination is afforded. that is especially so where, from the perspective of the father and icl they have formulated both the orders that they seek and their submissions in support of them on the basis of the mother’s evidence that she intends to comply with orders. if the mother’s position is now that she will not comply with orders of the court, and that her evidence in that respect should not be accepted, then the matter needs to be relisted to consider the options moving forward, including a retrial and the award of costs against the mother and potentially her representatives. other matters given the 2 page limit on response submissions and the pre-eminence of the duress issue which must be dealt with first, the father has not engaged with other issues in the mother’s submissions including but not limited to her insistence (erroneously) that the father is seeking a change of residence as a primary position, that he misled the court in relation to his income, and her new insistence that she cannot cope with complying with orders which is not supported by the evidence and was not the case she ran at trial.
submissions on behalf of the respondent
should the court make interim orders or final orders the icl’s submissions address only the interim orders she is seeking. the mother’s particular issues with those orders are set out at the end of these submissions. the mother opposes the making of interim orders. the mother’s case is that the father should spend no time with [x] and one of the significant aspects of her case is that as [x] no longer knows his father, he will not be traumatised if her proposed orders are made. [dr h’s] opinion is that there will be no significant short-term loss to [x] if he is not reintroduced to his father given “[x] has not had a clear relationship with his father since november 2018”. the court has now heard all the evidence and is in a position to make final orders. making interim orders as proposed by the icl would inevitably mean that the court has made findings against the mother’s case. making interim orders may also be an exercise in futility and expose [x] and the mother to further trauma and further litigation. it is conceded that had the father spent supervised time with [x] in accordance with the interim orders made on 29 april 2021, then the court would have had evidence with respect to the relationship between [x] and his father and how the time had progressed. it is accepted that the mother is responsible for that time not commencing but irrespective of the reasons, such time did not commence, and the court should now proceed to making final orders. the law in his judgment delivered earlier this year in the matter of mudin & bashar, mcclelland dcj was required to adjudicate on a matter whose facts were very similar to the case now before the court. the mother respectfully adopts his honour’s review of the law as being that which is also applicable in this case. primary considerations the fact that [x] has effectively no relationship with his father is only one aspect of the mother’s case. it is the mother’s case that risks to the child of spending time with his father outweigh the benefit of his having a meaningful relationship with his father. that risk relates to the child suffering psychological and/or physical abuse in the care of his father. there are also the additional psychological risks of exposing the child to the trauma the mother will suffer if she must comply with orders which she does not support. capacity absent the consideration of the mother not being able to facilitate a relationship with his father, the court will have no concerns about the mother’s capacity to provide appropriately for [x]'s needs. she has done so without the support of the father for nearly 3 years. the mother has demonstrated her capacity to care for [x] as a single parent and to ensure that his special medical needs have been addressed. the same cannot be said for the father who has not cared for [x] for nearly 3 years and has not demonstrated that he has the skills necessary to deal with the trauma that [x] will inevitably experience if he were to be placed into his primary care. based on her lived experience with the father, the mother believes that the father is an unacceptable risk to both her and [x]. even if the court were to find otherwise, the court will accept that her fears are genuine, and she would struggle to encourage the relationship between [x] and his father. [ms k] opined that “her accounts of [mr marella] during their marriage would reasonably raise significant cause for concern in terms of physical and emotional safety for [x]”. [ms k] found that the mother’s cognitive abilities and judgement showed some impairment”5 and that she meets criteria for 309.82 posttraumatic stress disorder. the icl appropriately concedes that the father’s “challenge” to his mental health in mid-2018 may have had a profound effect on the mother but seems to suggest that once the relationship ended, the mother had no basis for her ongoing fears. it submitted that, like many victims of family violence, exposure to family violence can have long lasting consequences. it is not simply a case of “out of sight, out of mind”. [ms n] questioned the mother’s capacity to comply with re-introduction orders. the mother has a history of noncompliance and made it clear to [ms n] and the court that she would not do so in the future. while the mother was in cross-examination, the matter was stood down so the mother could obtain legal advice about the implications of her continued refusal to comply with orders. it was clear that the icl’s position then was (and presumably still is) that if the mother was not going to comply with orders, then the icl was likely to seek orders that [x] live with his father. it would have come as no surprise to anyone that when the mother returned to the witness box, she then gave evidence that she would comply with orders. indeed, what parent, let alone one suffering from ptsd, would have done otherwise. in the face of that new evidence, the difficult question for the court is whether the mother has the capacity to comply with orders she does not agree with. [ms n] was of the view she may not be able to and having regard to the mother’s history of non-compliance with courts and her failure to engage with experts such as [ms k] and seeking personal counselling for herself, that finding is open to the court. when told by the icl that the mother had given evidence that she would comply with orders, [ms n] did indicate that would change her opinion. however, the difficulty is that [ms n] did not know the circumstances leading up to that evidence being given by the mother and the potential duress influencing her change of position. [dr h] is of the opinion that even if the court did find that the father was not an unacceptable risk, the mother would still find it challenging to overcome her fears and anxieties. it is trite to say the mother should accept the opinions of experts such as [dr h] that in relation to the father, there is “no unacceptable risk to the child from a mental health or personality perspective”. given the mother also experienced the trauma of having her grandmother murdered and has been found to be suffering ptsd as a result of the marriage relationship, it is understandable that she would have difficulty accepting the father has changed. the mother has expressed her concerns about the father and his family’s failure to properly supervise [x]. it is reasonable to expect the mother would be hyper-vigilant in ensuring [x]'s safety given his vulnerability due to his having significant health issues. being exposed the father’s poor mental health during the relationship would have been concerning and alarming for the mother and her being excluded from discussions about it by him and his parents would have added to her concerns and her ability to trust them. in the family report [ms n’s] opinion was that any contact with the father or the paternal family is likely to cause the mother considerable mental anguish and may reduce her ability to manage her diabetes effectively. in such circumstance, her capacity to meet [x]'s needs would also probably be impaired. [ms k] was of the view that the mother’s diabetes would be impacted by stress, and this should be taken into consideration in relation to any contact between the mother and father. it is important for [x]'s welfare that his mother, as his primary carer, remain in good health. [ms n] also expressed a concern that [x] would not enjoy contact with his father due to his exposure to the mother fears directly or indirectly. she goes on to opine that the mother appears unable to co-parent with the father due to her extreme fear of him and that there appears to be more risks associated with reintroducing [x] to his father than in his not having a relationship with his father. the court will accept that is the case. the father and his family have not seen [x] since november 2018 and his capacity to be his primary carer is untested. the is a real question about the father’s current state of mental health given that the father has sought compensation for his alleged trauma arising out of the incident between he and the maternal grandfather. in his application to victim’s services in february 2022, the father sets out details of how his mental health is being impacted which must raise some doubt about where he is as well as his treating psychiatrist and psychologist seem to believe. there is no evidence to suggest either of them know about these recent disclosures. the father disclosed to [ms n] that he receives the disability pension for his mental health issues. he did not disclose it, or his victim’s compensation claim in his affidavit. he disclosed his pension income in his financial statement but that did not inform the court the reasons why he qualified for the pension. the father is apparently unable to cope with obtaining employment and he is very dependent on his parents, despite his age. it is understandable that the mother would question his capacity to be able to care for [x]. had the father demonstrated that he had returned to independent living and been able to obtain employment, perhaps the mother would have more reason to accept [dr h’s] opinion that the father is no longer an unacceptable risk. however, the fact he has applied for a disability pension and compensation for alleged trauma would indicate that he continues to have limits to his capacity to function in society. his failure to disclose in his affidavit the reasons why he was on the on the disability pension and that he was seeking compensation for alleged psychological trauma are significant oversights on his part and it reflects poorly on his credit. the questions can be posed that if he is not mentally well enough to work, and needs therapy for ongoing trauma, how can he possibly expect to cope with being [x]'s carer on an unsupervised basis, let alone on a full-time basis. in his oral evidence, the father said that he had talked about finding employment. the court will reject that evidence because it is not in his affidavit. it is submitted that the only reason he said it in oral evidence was because he had worked out the implications for his case once the court found out his ongoing mental health issues were such that he had qualified for a disability pension. even if his evidence were true, and he did obtain employment, then he will not be available to care for [x] and the arrangements for [x] while in his care are unknown. the mother is available to care for [x] on a full-time basis as she is on a disability pension due to her suffering diabetes. at the time of the hearing, she was pregnant with her second child who will be a half sibling for [x]. it is submitted that the father lacks the capacity to step into the role of being [x]'s primary carer. when he prepared his report, despite being of the view that the father was mentally well, [dr h] did not suggest that putting [x] into his primary care as an option. his view was that [x] should remain living with the mother who presents as a capable caring parent who can continue to care for [x] and monitor his welfare. he opined that [x] is developing as well in her care as is possible. in relation to the time that [x] should spend with his father, [dr h’s] saw the choices being that [x] should spend no time with his father, or that the relationship be started in years to come, or that in a limited way there could be a gradual reintroduction. in his oral evidence, [dr h] was more positive about the father’s capacity but given that he found the father was well in 2020 when he made his recommendations in his report, it is unclear what positive changes have occurred in the father’s life to justify a change to his recommendations. in his report, [dr h’s] recommendations were that there could be card or video contact for 6 months and then supervised time for 1 year. he did not recommend that the father have overnight time until [x] was about 10 years of age and only then if the father remained well and stable. the icl’s recommendations are inconsistent with the expert’s recommendations. relationships the only relationships that the child presently has are with the mother and the maternal family. the child will have a half sibling after the birth of the mother’s new baby. the father and paternal family are all but strangers to [x]. effect of change the icl’s proposal is significantly different to the recommendations of [dr h], and it is submitted that if the court were to find that there should be a reintroduction of [x] to his father, that orders made for the re-introduction should more closely follow the expert’s recommendation. the icl’s view is that she would prefer that if the mother cannot, or will not, comply with orders for [x] to spend time with his father, the court should remove [x] from the only person [x] has a relationship with and give him to a family who are strangers to him. that would be akin to [x] losing his mother in death because if there was a change of residence ordered, the mother would likely be unable to cope with seeing [x] on either a supervised or unsupervised basis in the future and that may inevitably lead to her spending no time with him. being removed from his mother’s care will cause [x] significant trauma and the court can have no confidence that the father or his family have the capacity to help [x] through the initial grief, and the ongoing trauma every time he was to see his mother in the future. [x] will also lose his connection to the extended maternal family if the child is unable to spend time with the mother on an unsupervised basis. the father does not have the capacity to be [x]'s primary carer and much of that role will fall on his parent’s shoulders when [x] is in his care. the only way to minimise the risk of [x] suffering severe trauma is to make the orders sought by the mother. it is conceded that is the potential for some long-term risks that [dr h’s] refers to such as the possibility of the child suffering loss and confusion in the long -term to not know his father. it is submitted that the court will not make an order changing the child’s residence because the trauma the child will inevitably suffer as a result will be more damaging than the alternative and the father is not a viable option to replace the mother. financial support for [x] [x] is solely reliant on the mother to provide for his financial needs. even if the father is putting money into an account for [x] as he alleges, the mother has no access to those funds. the father’s evidence was that if she asks for, and proves what she needs the money for, he will pay it to her. this demonstrates that the father engages in coercive and controlling behaviour and it gives some insight into how difficult it would be for the mother to co-parent with the father in future, particularly if [x] was living primarily with his father. the mother should not be expected to have to approach the father, cap in hand, to ask for financial support for [x]. the father’s failure to provide any financial support to the mother so she can feed and clothe [x], and provide for his significant medical needs, demonstrates that the father is unwilling or unable to put [x]'s best interests first. there is a significant question as to how the father can fund the care of [x] if there were a change of residence. the father discloses and income of $550.10 pw in his financial statement but spends $1,658.83 pw. difficulty for future contact arrangements long term or indefinite supervision is not an option. the mother has no capacity to fund it and if the father continues to receive the disability pension rather than obtaining employment, then it is unrealistic to expect that either of them will have the funds to pay for supervision. contact centres do not provide subsidised supervision in the long-term. it is also unclear where the father will be living in the future. he is presently living in canberra. he says he is going to stay there unless he gets 3 or 4 days a fortnight with [x]. given both parties are in receipt of pension income, nether will be able to afford the travel necessary to deliver or collect [x]. family violence the court would accept that the mother’s evidence about the father having said he punched past her face while they were staying at [location u] and that he did not trust himself with [x]. the court will accept the mother’s evidence about what happened on 8 november 2018 when the father grabbed [x] out of her arms and tried to run away with him. the mother gave [ms n] an account of the father cutting his chest and legs with a knife while apparently sleepwalking which would have been very disturbing and distressing for her and [ms n] reports that the mother was distressed and crying while reporting her experiences to her. the court would accept the mother’s evidence that she was frightened by the father’s cousin, [mr v], attending her home and demanding to see [x]. the court will accept the mother’s evidence in relation to the incident she discloses in her trial affidavit under the heading “domestic violence.” the mother gave a plausible explanation for not previously disclosing the sexual abuse she suffered in the relationship. it is submitted that the icl’s jones v dunkel submission in relation to the absence of evidence from [mr ac] will be rejected. the absence of evidence can be explained. he was not a witness to the events and there is nothing to suggest that what the mother told him was in the nature of a fresh complaint. it was at best a prior consistent statement which would normally be inadmissible to prove the father had sexually abused her. the basis of the icl’s submission about the mother not having had “specific counselling or therapy where such an allegation may have arisen” is unclear. there is no evidence before the court that a person must have counselling before they can recall traumatic events they have previously not disclosed. it is submitted that the court will accept the mother’s evidence in relation to the family violence incidents she reports because her fear is genuine and consistent with her being exposed to family violence. [ms k] found that her ptsd condition was as a result of her marital relationship. given that so much family violence takes place in the privacy of homes where there are no witnesses other than the parties, it is not surprising that the father has not been charged with any criminal matter and apart from the mother’s allegations, that he does not have “a background or violence and abuse” as submitted by the icl. the fact the police did not pursue an extension of the advo does not establish that the father did not engage in family violence as alleged by the mother or that the mother did not remain in fear of the father. there is nothing in [dr h’s] report to suggest he was of the view that the mother’s reports of family violence were untrue or that her fears were not genuinely held. he referred to her having experienced her grandmother’s murder in the context of her finding it difficult to overcome her fears and to see the long-term benefits of being able to promote a relationship between [x] and his father. the fact that the father’s evidence is that he knew where the mother lived but did not approach her does not establish that the mother was not in fear that he might find her or take [x]. she was not privy to what he was, or was not, doing and she told [ms k] that she had “stopped hiding last year because [x] needs to be near family”. the court will accept her evidence that her concerns were real and made her feel anxious. change of name no doubt the mother would feel more comfortable of she did not have to refer to [x] by the father’s surname, but it is conceded there is no expert evidence about the advantages and disadvantages to [x] of allowing a change of name. further proceedings the only orders the court can make that will ensure that there are no further proceedings is to make the orders sought by the mother. making the orders sought by the icl and the father almost guarantee there will be further proceedings. icl’s interim orders sought the icl proposes that only interim orders be made and that the matter be brought back on in 6 months. the icl does not specify the minimum time the father should spend [x] while being supervised at the [city b] children’s contact service. given that the icl is seeking only interim orders, it is somewhat surprising that, depending on when her proposed orders started, the icl is proposing that the father should be permitted to take the child overseas for up to 3 weeks from december 2023 without having had any unsupervised time with [x] and after having had only a few overnight visits with the child at the home of his relatives. the proposed orders go straight from 1 overnight a fortnight (order 14c) to half school holidays (order 14d). depending on when the orders start, there may be no short school holiday periods that [x] spends with his father before he has to spend 3 weeks with his father in december 2023 when his father can take him overseas. it is unclear how the father being permitted to take [x] overseas on his own anytime soon can be in the child’s best interests. it shows complete disregard to how that would impact on [x] and/or the mother. the icl proposes that the only destination can be hague convention countries which does not include the popular (and cheap) holiday venue of [country ao]. there can be no reason to restrict the mother’s ability to take [x] overseas during the time he is to be with her. given the icl proposes that the mother can travel overseas from december 2023, the icl must be satisfied the mother will return after such holidays. there seems no reason why the mother should have to wait until december 2023 for such travel, or why it should be restricted to hague convention countries. if a party is going to abscond with a child, they can just change their travel plans while overseas. there is no risk the mother won’t return to australia. to require that the time the child spends with the father is occur in the presence of his family and that all overnight visits must occur at their homes, demonstrates that the icl does not accept that the father is capable of caring for the child absent his family’s support. the icl seeks an order that the father have the mother’s phone number. it is submitted that on the evidence before the court, it is clear the mother will never willingly engage with the father, and she should not be required to provide him with the ability to do so. the mother can have no confidence that the father’s treating doctor, psychiatrist or psychologist will be willing to disclose confidential information about him to the mother and they cannot be ordered to do so even if he gave them permission to do so.
submissions of the independent children’s lawyer
orders proposed by the independent children’s lawyer the icl has serious concerns that the mother will not comply with the proposed orders for the reintroduction of [x] to his father. the mother’s behaviour to date and her reluctance to answer basic questions put to her during cross-examination do not foster confidence that she will comply with the orders, notwithstanding her repeated assurances on the second day of hearing that she would. in these circumstances the icl has drafted proposed orders (annexed to these submissions) which provide for a gradual and professionally supported reintroduction of [x] to his father over a 6 month period with strict time frames for compliance, with the matter to be adjourned on a part heard basis for a period of 6 months so this process can occur with oversight of the court and the involvement of solicitors, including the icl. the icl seeks liberty to relist on short notice in the event any issues arise or the mother does not comply with the orders. in the event that [x] was not spending time with his father by the adjourned date, then the icl would seek leave to amend the proposed orders. the viability of the orders as proposed by the icl is dependent upon the mother complying with the orders the court makes. the mother repeatedly assured the court during hearing that she would comply with the court’s orders. the icl’s view as to final orders may differ significantly if the mother does not comply with the orders made by the court, such that a change of residence may then be the only way to ensure [x] has a meaningful relationship with both parents. given that both parties are in receipt of legal aid in the proceedings, no order is sought in relation to the costs of the icl. may it please the court.
outline of principle
... maternity and paternity always have an impact upon the wishes and mobility of parents, obligations both legal and moral, the latter sometimes lasting a lifetime, restrictive of personal choice and movement having been incurred.
... it must not be assumed that one parent (the father) cannot move and that the mother must, in every case, subordinate her ambitions and wishes, not to the needs of the child, but to the wishes of the father to pursue his life in a place of his choosing. it is the interests of the child which are paramount, not the interests or needs of the parents, let alone the interests of one of them.  4] the problems that family law legislation deals with are human problems: with all their attendant variety and complexity. and at the end of a court proceeding under such legislation, a judge must make an order - usually an order that says yes or no to some application. "[a] complicated mass of human experience has to be reduced to the simplest possible terms." because the problems are human problems, because they are as varied and complicated as they are, the legislature speaks in terms more often found in statements of aspiration than legal prescription. it is, then, hardly surprising that the guiding principles prescribed by the legislation for application in cases concerning the guardianship or custody of children or related issues, are principles that seldom, if ever, permit syllogistic reasoning. [205] further, when considering the reasons given by a judge who has made an order in an application about the guardianship or custody of children, it is necessary to bear steadily in mind that the judge must grapple with the chaotic complexity of real life, make predictions not only of what he or she concludes may happen in future but also of what will be "best" for the child, and do so having regard to what the parties have chosen to contest or emphasise in the course of the hearing.
on the one hand, the appellate court is obliged to “give the judgment which in its opinion ought to have been given in the first instance.” on the other, it must, of necessity, observe the “natural limitations” that exist in the case of any appellate court proceeding wholly or substantially on the record. these limitations include the disadvantage that the appellate court has when compared with the trial judge in respect of the evaluation of witnesses' credibility and of the “feeling” of a case which an appellate court, reading the transcript, cannot always fully share. furthermore, the appellate court does not typically get taken to, or read, all of the evidence taken at the trial. commonly, the trial judge therefore has advantages that derive from the obligation at trial to receive and consider the entirety of the evidence and the opportunity, normally over a longer interval, to reflect upon that evidence and to draw conclusions from it, viewed as a whole.   the provisions in the family law act 1975 (the act) relating to children rest on twin pillars. the first is the importance to children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm. these are stressed in s.60b(1) which sets out the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the primary considerations in s.60cc(1). [4] when deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children which are the paramount consideration. in determining where those best interests lie, the court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out in s.60cc. [5] there is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for him or her (s.61da). the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the time a child spends with each parent. the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the presumption may be rebutted if the court finds that it would not be in the best interests of the child for it to apply. [6] if the presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court must consider whether spending equal time with each parent would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(1)) and, if no such order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with each would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(2))  ] the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill revised explanatory memorandum (2006) refers to the concept of a meaningful relationship on a number of occasions. at para 52 it noted that the primary factors mirror the first two objects set out in the new s 60b and that the objects are elevated to primary considerations as they deal with important rights of children and encourage a child-focused approach. the paragraph continues:
the elevation of the object relating to the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents is consistent with the introduction of a presumption in favour of equal shared parental responsibility.  ] here, the concept of a meaningful relationship is closely tied with the introduction of the presumption of equal shared responsibility, and the passage links the concept of a meaningful relationship with the objects of the division. the objects use the words “meaningful involvement”. [22] at para 128, discussion of a meaningful relationship is again linked to discussion of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, the explanatory memorandum noting:
the government considers that it is important to ensure that a child has a meaningful relationship with both parents and that both parents participate in decisions about the child. the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not a presumption of 50:50 joint custody. the presumption relates solely to the decision making responsibilities of both parents. new section 65aa inserted by item 31 is the provision dealing with the time a child spends with each parent and the circumstances where the court should consider equal time arrangements.  ] when considering s 65daa, the explanatory memorandum states (at [196]–[199]):  6] subsection 65daa(2) recognises that an equal time arrangement will not be appropriate in some cases but that the court must consider other arrangements that promote a meaningful relationship. this provision places an obligation on the court in situations where there is equal shared parental responsibility and equal time is not appropriate, to consider whether it would be in the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial and significant time with both parents. this is intended to ensure that in making parenting orders related to time that the court focuses not just on the substantial quantity of time that is spent with each parent, but also on the significant type of time. the note in this section emphasises that the best interests of the chid remain the paramount consideration for parenting orders. this is set out in s 60ca by item 9. ... [199] section 65daa (2) — (4) is intended to ensure that the courts consider arrangements that are much more than “1 weekend a fortnight and half of the holidays” or an 80:20 arrangement. it is intended to ensure a focus both on the amount of time and the type of time. it would include both day time contact and night time contact. it recognises that what is important is that the focus be on ways that both parents are able to develop a meaningful relationships with their children and share important events including everyday time with the child. it recognises that in order to have a meaningful relationship and to share equal shared responsibility that this would generally involve “both” parents spending both substantial and significant time with their children.  ] the new shorter oxford english dictionary on historical principles, clarendon press, oxford, 1993, defines “meaningful” as “full of meaning or expression, significant, amenable to interpretation, having a recognisable function in a language or sign system, able to function as a term in such a system”. “meaning” is defined as “having intention or purpose, chiefly with a qualifying adverb (as well-meaning)”. a second definition is “conveying or expressing meaning or thought, expressive, meaningful, significant, suggestive”. these definitions are repeated and further fleshed out in the oxford english dictionary, 2nd ed, clarendon press, oxford, 1989. it defines “meaning” (in generalised use) as “significance”. the examples provided take the matter no further. [25] the macquarie dictionary, 4th ed, macquarie university press, sydney, 2005, defines meaningful as “full of meaning, significant”. within the definitions of meaning, the relevant one defines the word as “expressive or significant: a meaning look”. [26] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive [sic] one. quantitive [sic] concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.
even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.
i am conscious that a long-distance relationship, with longer but less frequent times spent together, is inevitably different from a relationship where people live closer together with regular face-to-face contact. but it does not itself mean it cannot be meaningful.
we also observe that in champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 the full court (thackray, o’ryan & benjamin jj) observed at [103]:
the submissions of counsel for the father also appeared at times to be based on an assumption that it was obligatory for the trial judge to make the orders most likely to ensure the children had a “meaningful relationship” with both parents. this is an incorrect assumption. the court’s obligation is to make the orders most likely to promote the child’s best interests. in seeking to achieve that objective, s 60cc(2)(a) directs the court to consider “the benefit to the child” of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. even if such a benefit is established, it must still be weighed along with all of the other relevant factors. (see bennett j’s analysis in g & c [2006] famca 994.) (emphasis in original)
the full court also observed at [191]: “the first and very important observation we would make about this complaint is that the expression ‘meaningful relationship’ is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a ‘meaningful relationship’ ”.  7] for our part, we echo the view expressed by the trial judge of the serious nature of depriving the father of contact in circumstances where that appears to have been engineered by the mother, without any fault on the part of the father at all. this cannot be in a child's best interests. [178] it also does not appear to us to be appropriate for a parent to be able to manipulate the family law system to such an extent that the other parent's hope of ever seeing the child again, rests upon the possibility that she may wish to seek him out in later adolescence or adulthood. [179] we think that a family court would not be doing its duty if it were to simply give in to these sorts of considerations, except in the most extreme case and only then, when a positive determination is made that the welfare of the child requires it.
given the overriding consideration of the welfare of the child, the court must consider the conduct of the parents, not with a view to rewarding one or punishing the other, but to ascertain from such conduct whether the welfare of the child will be better served in the custody of one or the other.
consideration and disposition
the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. note: making these considerations the primary ones is consistent with the objects of this part set out in paragraphs 60b(1)(a) and (b). (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b).
associate: dated: 16 november 2022
dated: 16 november 2022
[1] the initial expert in the matter, and only independent psychiatrist, dr h, stated in his oral evidence that the mother was “high-functioning”, able “to manage ... critical situations well and being able to adapt”, and that she “has done an amazingly competent job caring for x and helping him get through cardiac surgery ... and having ... severe illness ...” transcript (5th may 2022) 146. an almost identical comment was made by the psychiatrist at transcript (5th may 2022) 151. hereafter, such references will simply be “t” followed by the page number. the “perfect storm” reference is at t 148. another expert, ms k, agreed with the assessment of the mother as a “can do” person, and someone “getting on with things”: t 164.[2] the distance between canberra and city c (nsw) is some 360 kilometres, a drive of between 4 – 4½ hours, depending on the route taken.[3] these orders do not reflect the mother’s later evidence on day 2 of the final hearing where she accepted that, if the court directed that x should commence spending time with the father, she would comply with those orders.[4] t 14. [5] t 15.[6] t 16[7] t 17. [8] t 18 – 19. [9] t 19 – 20. [10] t 23. [11] t 23 – 24. [12] t 25.[13] t 26. [14] t 26. [15] on page 52 of the icl’s tender bundle is a cop’s report, dated 20th june 2018, which reports that the human resources manager at the employer t reported to the police that she was aware that the father was off work for stress leave for 2 months. see t 27. [16] t 29.[17] t 29.[18] t 31. [19] t 32. [20] t 32. [21] t 33. [22] t 34. [23] t 35 – 36.[24] t 36. [25] t 36.[26] t 37.[27] t 38.[28] t 38. [29] t 39.[30] t 41. [31] t 42.[32] t 43 – 44.[33] t 44 – 45.[34] t 45 – 46.[35] t 46.[36] t 46. [37] t 47.[38] t 47.[39] t 48. [40] t 49.[41] t 49.[42] t 49 – 50. [43] see also the discussion at t 53 – 55 where the father said that at the time when the funding was sought from the general public, he and the mother were still together. he confirmed that the mother opposed what he was doing in this regard and after 3 or 4 days where the post, which included some photographs of x, was on the go fund me page, he took those photos down at the mother’s request. [44] t 51. [45] t 51. [46] t 52.[47] t 55.[48] t 57. [49] t 59. [50] noted later, it is clear that dr o’s comments trespass somewhat into the realm of advocacy on behalf of the father.[51] t 63.[52] t 64.[53] t 64.[54] t 65.[55] t 66.[56] t 67.[57] t 67 – 68. in my view, again a degree of advocacy was apparent in dr o’s comments.[58] t 83.[59] t 83. [60] t 83 – 84.[61] t 84. [62] t 85.[63] t 85.[64] t 85.[65] t 86 – 87. [66] t 87 – 88.[67] t 89.[68] t 90.[69] the mother’s father was present in court throughout the proceedings but took no active part in it. see t 91. [70] t 93.[71] t 94 – 95.[72] t 95 – 96. [73] t 97.[74] t 97 – 98. [75] t 98. [76] t 100. [77] t 101. [78] t 102.[79] t 103. [80] t 103. see also the discussion at t 104. [81] t 105.[82] t 110 – 111. [83] t 111. [84] t 112.[85] t 112. [86] t 113. [87] t 113. [88] t 115. [89] t 116. [90] t 117.[91] t 118 – 119. [92] t 119.[93] t 121 – 122. [94] generally see the discussion at t 124 – 125. [95] t 126. [96] t 127 – 128. [97] t 128. [98] t 130.[99] t 131. [100] t 135. [101] t 140-141.[102] t142 – 144.[103] t 145. [104] t 145. see also t 145 – 146 regarding the father’s compliance with medication and his therapies and that there has been no hospitalisation of the father since his admission to the q clinic in 2018. [105] t 146 – 147.[106] t 147. [107] t 147.[108] t 147.[109] t 148.[110] t 149.[111] t 149 – 150.[112] t 150. [113] t 150.[114] t 151. [115] t 151.[116] t 152.[117] t 175.[118] t 176.[119] see the discussion at t 176 and 177. [120] t 177.[121] t 178.[122] t 179-180.[123] t 158.[124] t 159.[125] t 160.[126] t 161.[127] t 161 – 162.[128] t 162.[129] t 163.[130] t 163 – 164.[131] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238.[132] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.211 [150].[133] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.228 [204] & [205]. of course, the comments by both kirby & hayne jj were in a legislative context different to that which operates today. accepting that qualification, respectfully, their honour’s comments remain important.[134] fox v percy (2003) 214 clr 118 at pp.125-126 [23]. see also the extensive discussion by mchugh j in the same case at [65] – [93].[135] [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [3] – [6]. brown j’s comments were endorsed by boland j (with whom may & o’reilly jj agreed) in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108; (2008) flc 93-375 at [67] – [68].[136] brown j’s remarks in this regard were endorsed by the full court in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108; (2008) flc 93-375 at [69], and even more recently by a differently constituted full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483 at [115] & [121]. more recently still, a further full court in collu & rinaldo [2010] famcafc 53 at [335], similarly endorsed brown j’s remarks, as did the full court in vontek v vontek [2017] famcafc 28 at [26].[137] godfrey v sanders [2007] famca 102; (2007) 208 flr 287.[138] m v s [2006] famca 1408; (2008) 37 fam lr 32.[139] mccall v clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) 41 fam lr 483.[140] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[141] sigley v evor [2011] famcafc 22; (2011) 44 fam lr 439.[142] bondelmonte v bondelmonte [2017] hca 8; (2017) 259 clr 662 at [34] – [35] and [43]. of course, in considering a child’s views, the court should also be mindful of potential consequences if orders are made that are contrary to any expressed views of a child or children. [143] in the marriage of r [2002] famca 383; (2002) 169 flr 243; 29 fam lr 230.[144] among other places, see the full court decision in partington v cade (no.2) [2009] famcafc 230; (2009) 42 fam lr 401 at [48] and [56].[145] in the marriage of kress (1976) 13 alr 309.