last updated: 22 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
messner & patten [2022] fedcfamc2f 1742
orders
the court orders:
living and spending time arrangements
noting: that the mother will positively encourage the children to have a relationship with their father, and
noting: that the child x presently does not wish to spend time with or communicate with the father, and if time or exchange is facilitated at c contact centre it is the policy of c contact centre not to continue with the time spending or exchange if a child does not wish to participate with same.   during the school term each week: (i) on wednesdays from 3.00 pm to 5.00 pm. (ii) from 9.00 am to 5.00 pm each sunday. (b) during the school holidays each week: (i) from 9.00 am to 5.00 pm each wednesday and sunday.   on wednesdays from 3.00 pm to 5.00 pm. (ii) from 9.00 am to 5.00 pm each sunday.  ) from 9.00 am to 5.00 pm each sunday.   during the school holidays each week: (i) from 9.00 am to 5.00 pm each wednesday and sunday.   from 9.00 am to 5.00 pm each wednesday and sunday.   during the school term: (i) for six months, wednesdays from 3.00 pm to 5.00 pm and from friday at 3:00 pm until 5.00 pm saturday with exchange at c contact centre. (ii) provided that the father has complied with order 9(a)(i), after six months the children’s time with the father shall be on wednesdays from 3.00 pm to 5.00 pm and from friday at 3:00 pm until 5 pm sunday. (b) during the school holidays each week: (i) if the father has not complied with order 9(a)(i), in week 1 and 3 of the holidays from 9.00 am thursday until 5.00 pm saturday. (ii) provided that the father has complied with order 9(a)(i) in week 1 and 3 of the holidays from 9.00 am thursday until 5.00 pm sunday.   for six months, wednesdays from 3.00 pm to 5.00 pm and from friday at 3:00 pm until 5.00 pm saturday with exchange at c contact centre. (ii) provided that the father has complied with order 9(a)(i), after six months the children’s time with the father shall be on wednesdays from 3.00 pm to 5.00 pm and from friday at 3:00 pm until 5 pm sunday.  ) provided that the father has complied with order 9(a)(i), after six months the children’s time with the father shall be on wednesdays from 3.00 pm to 5.00 pm and from friday at 3:00 pm until 5 pm sunday.   during the school holidays each week: (i) if the father has not complied with order 9(a)(i), in week 1 and 3 of the holidays from 9.00 am thursday until 5.00 pm saturday. (ii) provided that the father has complied with order 9(a)(i) in week 1 and 3 of the holidays from 9.00 am thursday until 5.00 pm sunday.   if the father has not complied with order 9(a)(i), in week 1 and 3 of the holidays from 9.00 am thursday until 5.00 pm saturday. (ii) provided that the father has complied with order 9(a)(i) in week 1 and 3 of the holidays from 9.00 am thursday until 5.00 pm sunday.  ) provided that the father has complied with order 9(a)(i) in week 1 and 3 of the holidays from 9.00 am thursday until 5.00 pm sunday.
exchange of the children  shall be a c contact centre, at times which are as close to those provided for by these orders as c contact centre can arrange, (b) on days when c contact centre is not open exchange shall be at the city b police station or another police station in the darwin area which is open and nominated by the mother.   on days when c contact centre is not open exchange shall be at the city b police station or another police station in the darwin area which is open and nominated by the mother.
special days  on the children's birthdays, with the party who does not have the child in their care, for at least 2 hours from 2.30 pm unless otherwise agreed after school if a school day, and for 5 hours on a non-school day from 12 noon until 5.00 pm. (b) on father’s day with the father from 9.00 am until 5.00 pm. (c) on mother’s day with the mother from 9.00 am until 5.00 pm. (d) on christmas day: (i) with the father from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day and with the mother from 12 noon christmas day until 12 noon boxing day, in all even numbered years. (ii) with the mother from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day and with the father from 12 noon christmas day until 12 noon boxing day, in all odd numbered years. (iii) that should the children not be spending overnight time with the father pursuant to these orders, and should that time not be supervised, the children’s time with the children shall conclude at 5 pm on christmas eve and 5 pm christmas day.   on father’s day with the father from 9.00 am until 5.00 pm. (c) on mother’s day with the mother from 9.00 am until 5.00 pm. (d) on christmas day: (i) with the father from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day and with the mother from 12 noon christmas day until 12 noon boxing day, in all even numbered years. (ii) with the mother from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day and with the father from 12 noon christmas day until 12 noon boxing day, in all odd numbered years. (iii) that should the children not be spending overnight time with the father pursuant to these orders, and should that time not be supervised, the children’s time with the children shall conclude at 5 pm on christmas eve and 5 pm christmas day.   on mother’s day with the mother from 9.00 am until 5.00 pm. (d) on christmas day: (i) with the father from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day and with the mother from 12 noon christmas day until 12 noon boxing day, in all even numbered years. (ii) with the mother from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day and with the father from 12 noon christmas day until 12 noon boxing day, in all odd numbered years. (iii) that should the children not be spending overnight time with the father pursuant to these orders, and should that time not be supervised, the children’s time with the children shall conclude at 5 pm on christmas eve and 5 pm christmas day.   on christmas day: (i) with the father from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day and with the mother from 12 noon christmas day until 12 noon boxing day, in all even numbered years. (ii) with the mother from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day and with the father from 12 noon christmas day until 12 noon boxing day, in all odd numbered years. (iii) that should the children not be spending overnight time with the father pursuant to these orders, and should that time not be supervised, the children’s time with the children shall conclude at 5 pm on christmas eve and 5 pm christmas day.   with the father from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day and with the mother from 12 noon christmas day until 12 noon boxing day, in all even numbered years. (ii) with the mother from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day and with the father from 12 noon christmas day until 12 noon boxing day, in all odd numbered years. (iii) that should the children not be spending overnight time with the father pursuant to these orders, and should that time not be supervised, the children’s time with the children shall conclude at 5 pm on christmas eve and 5 pm christmas day.  ) with the mother from 12 noon christmas eve until 12 noon christmas day and with the father from 12 noon christmas day until 12 noon boxing day, in all odd numbered years. (iii) that should the children not be spending overnight time with the father pursuant to these orders, and should that time not be supervised, the children’s time with the children shall conclude at 5 pm on christmas eve and 5 pm christmas day.  i) that should the children not be spending overnight time with the father pursuant to these orders, and should that time not be supervised, the children’s time with the children shall conclude at 5 pm on christmas eve and 5 pm christmas day.
swimming and the father’s accommodation   personally supervise the children if they are swimming, and only access his telephone to take calls only, and (b) take the children to their usual extracurricular activities.   take the children to their usual extracurricular activities.
the mother’s travel interstate and overseas  that the mother is to provide 21 days’ notice to the father with such notice to include the country, itinerary, suburb where the children will be staying and contact numbers for the children. (b) that the mother shall provide the father photographs of the children during their travel. (c) that the travel interstate shall not include christmas day (except on odd-numbered years) or special days where the father is scheduled to be in darwin, but otherwise when the children are interstate the father’s time with the children shall be suspended. (d) that in the case of a family emergency or severe illness, the mother may have additional time interstate, provided each period is no greater than 7 days. (e) that should the children not be spending time with the father, notwithstanding any other order the mother may take the children away from darwin during school holidays up to the duration of the relevant school holiday.   that the mother shall provide the father photographs of the children during their travel. (c) that the travel interstate shall not include christmas day (except on odd-numbered years) or special days where the father is scheduled to be in darwin, but otherwise when the children are interstate the father’s time with the children shall be suspended. (d) that in the case of a family emergency or severe illness, the mother may have additional time interstate, provided each period is no greater than 7 days. (e) that should the children not be spending time with the father, notwithstanding any other order the mother may take the children away from darwin during school holidays up to the duration of the relevant school holiday.   that the travel interstate shall not include christmas day (except on odd-numbered years) or special days where the father is scheduled to be in darwin, but otherwise when the children are interstate the father’s time with the children shall be suspended. (d) that in the case of a family emergency or severe illness, the mother may have additional time interstate, provided each period is no greater than 7 days. (e) that should the children not be spending time with the father, notwithstanding any other order the mother may take the children away from darwin during school holidays up to the duration of the relevant school holiday.   that in the case of a family emergency or severe illness, the mother may have additional time interstate, provided each period is no greater than 7 days. (e) that should the children not be spending time with the father, notwithstanding any other order the mother may take the children away from darwin during school holidays up to the duration of the relevant school holiday.   that should the children not be spending time with the father, notwithstanding any other order the mother may take the children away from darwin during school holidays up to the duration of the relevant school holiday.
communication  shall be at all times respectful, shall not include swearing or threats, and shall not be denigrating of the other party. (b) shall not be excessive or repeated. (c) shall only be in relation to parenting issues directly relevant to the children. (d) shall not include any suggestions about meeting or communicating except as provided for by these orders, the relationship between the parties, or any other matter not directly related to parenting. (e) may include proposals to change orders, but any such proposals which are rejected shall not made more than 3 times in total. (f) shall not include an accusation that the other party doesn’t care for the children, does not love the children, or that the other party is motivated by something other than the best interest of the children. (g) shall not include false or unsubstantiated allegations against the other party.   shall not be excessive or repeated. (c) shall only be in relation to parenting issues directly relevant to the children. (d) shall not include any suggestions about meeting or communicating except as provided for by these orders, the relationship between the parties, or any other matter not directly related to parenting. (e) may include proposals to change orders, but any such proposals which are rejected shall not made more than 3 times in total. (f) shall not include an accusation that the other party doesn’t care for the children, does not love the children, or that the other party is motivated by something other than the best interest of the children. (g) shall not include false or unsubstantiated allegations against the other party.   shall only be in relation to parenting issues directly relevant to the children. (d) shall not include any suggestions about meeting or communicating except as provided for by these orders, the relationship between the parties, or any other matter not directly related to parenting. (e) may include proposals to change orders, but any such proposals which are rejected shall not made more than 3 times in total. (f) shall not include an accusation that the other party doesn’t care for the children, does not love the children, or that the other party is motivated by something other than the best interest of the children. (g) shall not include false or unsubstantiated allegations against the other party.   shall not include any suggestions about meeting or communicating except as provided for by these orders, the relationship between the parties, or any other matter not directly related to parenting. (e) may include proposals to change orders, but any such proposals which are rejected shall not made more than 3 times in total. (f) shall not include an accusation that the other party doesn’t care for the children, does not love the children, or that the other party is motivated by something other than the best interest of the children. (g) shall not include false or unsubstantiated allegations against the other party.   may include proposals to change orders, but any such proposals which are rejected shall not made more than 3 times in total. (f) shall not include an accusation that the other party doesn’t care for the children, does not love the children, or that the other party is motivated by something other than the best interest of the children. (g) shall not include false or unsubstantiated allegations against the other party.   shall not include an accusation that the other party doesn’t care for the children, does not love the children, or that the other party is motivated by something other than the best interest of the children. (g) shall not include false or unsubstantiated allegations against the other party.   shall not include false or unsubstantiated allegations against the other party.   involve the children in adult issues between the parents including financial matters (including about any disputes between the parties) (b) involve the children as a conduit for communication between them. (c) speak disrespectfully to the children. (d) speak disrespectfully about the other party to the children.   involve the children as a conduit for communication between them. (c) speak disrespectfully to the children. (d) speak disrespectfully about the other party to the children.   speak disrespectfully to the children. (d) speak disrespectfully about the other party to the children.   speak disrespectfully about the other party to the children.   be each monday at 4:45 pm or 7.30 pm if the father’s work shift is such that he cannot ring at 4:45 pm, with the father to give the mother at least 48 hours notice the call is to be at 7:30 pm rather than 4:45 pm. (b) on days when the children are spending time with the father, order 20(a) is suspended. (c) shall be monitored by the mother if she so wishes and should the father breach order 20(a) at the mother’s discretion, telephone communication between the children shall be suspended for 4 weeks.   on days when the children are spending time with the father, order 20(a) is suspended. (c) shall be monitored by the mother if she so wishes and should the father breach order 20(a) at the mother’s discretion, telephone communication between the children shall be suspended for 4 weeks.   shall be monitored by the mother if she so wishes and should the father breach order 20(a) at the mother’s discretion, telephone communication between the children shall be suspended for 4 weeks.
other
injunctions
reasons for judgmentex tempore
judge young
the father presented as emotionally intense, defensive and intermittently agitated at interview.
the father was particularly critical of the mother though he acknowledged she was a good mother but said that she was attempting to brainwash the children with an attempt to sever their relationship with him.
... anxious, defensive and disempowered. he lacks capacity to regulate his emotions in the context of engaging in the family law process.
the family consultant said of the mother that she presented as:
... protective and capable of providing safe care for the children. while she offers support for the children to enjoy time and a relationship with the father it is unclear if she is genuinely motivated to encourage this outcome.
both children present as vulnerable, and it is recommended that they should be engaged in counselling with a service that is familiar with separated families who are engaged in enduring conflict.
she made some other remarks about y’s speech delay and the need to have her engage in paediatric assessment. she said that both parents need to protect these children from exposure to their conflict. she said that the father:
... needs to ensure that he regulates his emotions, engages in a child-focused manner and provides a safe and nurturing home environment. [mr patten] presents as emotionally vulnerable, disempowered and in need of support and historically he has engaged in counselling and participating in parenting courses, but he is resistant to ongoing attendance. concerns remain about his demeanour, tendency to blame others and his inability to accept responsibility for his own actions. despite his opposition to engaging in support [mr patten] should be required to engage in counselling with a focus on managing his emotions or complete a men’s behaviour change program.
various other recommendations were made including a recommendation that, in the absence of agreement, the mother should be permitted to make decisions relating to the children’s care, welfare and development, in other words, parental responsibility.   patten] does not acknowledge or take responsibility for any abuse. however, the allegations are of:   patten] was very heightened throughout the assessment, agitated and more focused on what she is doing rather than what he is doing.   patten] was argumentative from the start of group and focused on actively engaging the other members to collude with him. it was difficult to keep him on topic as he takes no responsibility for his behaviour.
the legislative pathway
the views expressed by the children
the nature of the relationship with the children with their parents
the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long term issues etc
the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled or failed to fulfil the parent’s obligations to maintain the child
the likely effect of any change in the circumstances of the children.
the capacity of the child’s parents to provide for the needs of the children including emotional and intellectual needs
associate: dated: 14 december 2022
dated: 14 december 2022