last updated: 14 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
dalley [2022] fedcfamc2f 1642
orders
the court orders that:
it is noted that:
the court further orders that:
and it is further noted that:  the judgment by this court under any pseudonym as approved by the chief justice pursuant to s 121(9)(g) of the family law act 1975 (cth), (b) the sealed orders of this court may be held by the mother and disclosed by the mother to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages (nsw) and any other person to whom it is necessary for the mother to engage with in order to give effect to these orders.   the sealed orders of this court may be held by the mother and disclosed by the mother to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages (nsw) and any other person to whom it is necessary for the mother to engage with in order to give effect to these orders.
reasons for judgment
judge mansfield:
introducton  parties to the proceeding and/or proceeding ex-parte and undefended, (ii) the change of name and issuing of a passport, and (iii) making of a suppression or non-publication order.  ) the change of name and issuing of a passport, and (iii) making of a suppression or non-publication order.  i) making of a suppression or non-publication order.
the hearing  an order was made dispensing with the requirements for service upon the then respondent father, and (b) an interim suppression and non-publication order was made, pursuant to section 102pe and 102ph of the family law act 1975 (“the act”), prohibiting and restricting the publication and disclosure of information tending to reveal the identity of or otherwise concerning any party or witness in the proceedings, and (c) trial directions were made and the matter listed for hearing on 15 november 2022.   an interim suppression and non-publication order was made, pursuant to section 102pe and 102ph of the family law act 1975 (“the act”), prohibiting and restricting the publication and disclosure of information tending to reveal the identity of or otherwise concerning any party or witness in the proceedings, and (c) trial directions were made and the matter listed for hearing on 15 november 2022.   trial directions were made and the matter listed for hearing on 15 november 2022.
facts, matters & circumstances
parties to the proceeding and/or proceeding ex-parte and undefended
births, deaths and marriages registration act 1995 - sect 28 (1) the parents of a child may apply to the registrar, in a form approved by the registrar, for registration of a change of the child's name if--   the child's birth is registered in the state, or (b) the child was born outside australia, the child's birth is not registered in australia and the child has been resident in the state for at least 3 consecutive years immediately preceding the date of the application.   if the parents of the child are dead, cannot be found or for some other reason cannot exercise their parental responsibilities in relation to the child, the application may be made by a person to whom a court within australia has allocated--   parental responsibility for the child, or (b) specific aspects of parental responsibility for the child so long as the making of the application is not outside the scope of the aspects allocated.  ) if there is more than one such person referred to in subsection (2), the application may be made only as a joint application of those persons. (3) an application for registration of a change of a child's name may be made by one parent if--   the applicant is the sole parent named in the registration of the child's birth under this act or any other law (including a corresponding law), or (b) there is no other surviving parent of the child, or (c) a court approves the proposed change of name.   the district court may, on application by a child's parent, approve a proposed change of name for the child if satisfied that the change is in the child's best interests. (5) if any court (including any court of another state or the commonwealth) approves a proposed name for a child, the court may order the registrar to register the child's name in a form specified in the order. (6) in this section--
“parental responsibility” , in relation to a child, means all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law, parents have in relation to their children.
australian passports act 2005 - sect 11 (1) the minister must not issue an australian travel document to a child unless:   each person who has parental responsibility for the child consents to the child having an australian travel document, or (b) an order of a court of the commonwealth, a state or a territory permits:  the child to have an australian travel document, or (ii) the child to travel internationally, or (iii) the child to live or spend time with another person who is outside australia. ...  for the purposes of this section, a person has parental responsibility for a child if, and only if:   the person:  is the child's parent ... , and (ii) has not ceased to have parental responsibility for the child because of an order made under the family law act 1975 , or ...  under a parenting order:  the child is to live with the person, or (ii) the person has parental responsibility for the child, or  the person has ... parental responsibility for the child under a law of the commonwealth, a state or a territory.   if an application is made for a parenting order in relation to a child, the following must be parties to the proceeding:   the parents of the child, ...   if a person referred to in subrule (1) is not an applicant in a proceeding involving the child, the person must be joined as a respondent to the application.   the court may, in the interests of justice, dispense with compliance, or full compliance, with any of these rules at any time. (2) if, in a proceeding, the court gives a direction or makes an order that is inconsistent with any of these rules, the direction or order of the court prevails in that proceeding.
proceedings in relation to the welfare of children are not strictly adversarial, having regard to the court's obligation to treat the welfare of the child as the paramount consideration: m v m (1988) 12 fam lr 606, [1988] flc 91-979. this overriding principle governs the procedure as well as the substantive issues.
in j v lieschke [1987] hca 4, (1986-7) 162 clr 447 the high court held that a court must take account of the nature of the jurisdiction being exercised in determining the content of the principles of natural justice to be applied. in the exercise of its jurisdiction to determine disputes relating to the custody, guardianship or welfare of, or access to a child, the family court has obligations to regard the child's welfare as paramount (s 64(1)(a)), to protect the child from harm (s 64(1)(b)(a)), and to make “such order in respect of those matters as it considers proper” (s 64(1)(c)). the rights of the disputants to natural justice are therefore qualified to the extent that those rights encroach on or are in conflict with these obligations.
whilst natural justice will require that the parents are given all reasonable opportunity to present the evidence relevant to support their “case”, it will not justify an unlimited right to do so at the expense of the interests of the children.
i doubt that the discussion about whether the welfare of the child principle overrides notions of natural justice is appropriate at all. principles of natural justice or perhaps more aptly, the requirement that there be a fair trial, do not authorise the infliction of physical of psychological damage to a child or any other person.   there is no prejudice to the father in the circumstances where the mother already has sole parental responsibility, and (b) on the mother’s evidence there is likely to be hardship or danger to the child should the father be provided with notice of the application, and, there is no plausible scope for evidence that may be adduced by the father that could possibly undermine the mother’s evidence.   on the mother’s evidence there is likely to be hardship or danger to the child should the father be provided with notice of the application, and, there is no plausible scope for evidence that may be adduced by the father that could possibly undermine the mother’s evidence.
the change of name and issuing of a passport.  any embarrassment likely to be experienced by the child if his or her name is different from the parent with residence or care and control, (b) any confusion of identity which may arise for the child if his or her name is changed or is not changed, (c) the effect any change in surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bore during the relationship, (d) the effect of frequent or random changes of name, (e) the contact that the non-custodial parent has had and is likely to have in the future with the child, (f) the degree of identification that the child or children have with their non-custodial parent, and (g) the degree of identification which the child or children have with the parent with whom they live.   any confusion of identity which may arise for the child if his or her name is changed or is not changed, (c) the effect any change in surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bore during the relationship, (d) the effect of frequent or random changes of name, (e) the contact that the non-custodial parent has had and is likely to have in the future with the child, (f) the degree of identification that the child or children have with their non-custodial parent, and (g) the degree of identification which the child or children have with the parent with whom they live.   the effect any change in surname may have on the relationship between the child and the parent whose name the child bore during the relationship, (d) the effect of frequent or random changes of name, (e) the contact that the non-custodial parent has had and is likely to have in the future with the child, (f) the degree of identification that the child or children have with their non-custodial parent, and (g) the degree of identification which the child or children have with the parent with whom they live.   the effect of frequent or random changes of name, (e) the contact that the non-custodial parent has had and is likely to have in the future with the child, (f) the degree of identification that the child or children have with their non-custodial parent, and (g) the degree of identification which the child or children have with the parent with whom they live.   the contact that the non-custodial parent has had and is likely to have in the future with the child, (f) the degree of identification that the child or children have with their non-custodial parent, and (g) the degree of identification which the child or children have with the parent with whom they live.   the degree of identification that the child or children have with their non-custodial parent, and (g) the degree of identification which the child or children have with the parent with whom they live.   the degree of identification which the child or children have with the parent with whom they live.
making of a suppression or non-publication order.
pursuant to ss 102pe and 102ph of the family law act 1975 a suppression order and a non-publication order is made prohibiting and restricting the publication and disclosure of all information that relates to these proceedings and information tending to reveal the identity of or otherwise concerning any party to or witness in the proceedings or any person who is related to or otherwise associated with any party to or witness in the proceedings. it is noted that the grounds for making the suppression order and the non-publication order are pursuant to section 102pf(1)(c) to protect the safety of both the applicant and the child.
the registrar of births, deaths and marriages is hereby requested to not release the child’s birth certificate to the father at any time or advise him of any details relating to it. the mother be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to nsw births, deaths and marriages, and the australian passport office.   a primary objective of the administration of justice is to safeguard the public interest in open justice (s 102pf of the act). this is arguably met by making available sufficient reasons for the orders (ak v western australia [2008] hca 8, (2008) 232 clr 438) relative to the justice of the case (public service board (nsw) v osmond (1986) 159 clr 656), and (ii) what form of orders are sufficient to protect the mother and the child from the father, whilst still providing for the orders to be given effect.  ) what form of orders are sufficient to protect the mother and the child from the father, whilst still providing for the orders to be given effect.   any suppression order powers conferred by statute should be construed so as to minimise their intrusion on the open justice principle. (b) the provisions extend not only to evidence, submissions or other material before the court at the hearing, but also to the judgment resulting from the trial or hearing. (c) “necessary” has a high threshold and means something more than convenient, reasonable or sensible. it is not a balancing exercise. (d) the term “necessary” is not to be given restricted meaning. it has to be interpreted and applied in context, including adverting to potentially irrational and illogical responses to information. (e) personal safety of a witness or associated party may be sufficient to supress parts of a judgment, including those parts of the judgment dealing with the application for a suppression order. (f) in the event that there is even some doubt that a party’s or witness’ safety may be compromised, the party for whose protection the suppression order is to be made is to be given the benefit of that doubt. (g) the fact that the contemplated outcome may never occur is not fatal to a finding that an order is necessary.   the provisions extend not only to evidence, submissions or other material before the court at the hearing, but also to the judgment resulting from the trial or hearing. (c) “necessary” has a high threshold and means something more than convenient, reasonable or sensible. it is not a balancing exercise. (d) the term “necessary” is not to be given restricted meaning. it has to be interpreted and applied in context, including adverting to potentially irrational and illogical responses to information. (e) personal safety of a witness or associated party may be sufficient to supress parts of a judgment, including those parts of the judgment dealing with the application for a suppression order. (f) in the event that there is even some doubt that a party’s or witness’ safety may be compromised, the party for whose protection the suppression order is to be made is to be given the benefit of that doubt. (g) the fact that the contemplated outcome may never occur is not fatal to a finding that an order is necessary.   “necessary” has a high threshold and means something more than convenient, reasonable or sensible. it is not a balancing exercise. (d) the term “necessary” is not to be given restricted meaning. it has to be interpreted and applied in context, including adverting to potentially irrational and illogical responses to information. (e) personal safety of a witness or associated party may be sufficient to supress parts of a judgment, including those parts of the judgment dealing with the application for a suppression order. (f) in the event that there is even some doubt that a party’s or witness’ safety may be compromised, the party for whose protection the suppression order is to be made is to be given the benefit of that doubt. (g) the fact that the contemplated outcome may never occur is not fatal to a finding that an order is necessary.   the term “necessary” is not to be given restricted meaning. it has to be interpreted and applied in context, including adverting to potentially irrational and illogical responses to information. (e) personal safety of a witness or associated party may be sufficient to supress parts of a judgment, including those parts of the judgment dealing with the application for a suppression order. (f) in the event that there is even some doubt that a party’s or witness’ safety may be compromised, the party for whose protection the suppression order is to be made is to be given the benefit of that doubt. (g) the fact that the contemplated outcome may never occur is not fatal to a finding that an order is necessary.   personal safety of a witness or associated party may be sufficient to supress parts of a judgment, including those parts of the judgment dealing with the application for a suppression order. (f) in the event that there is even some doubt that a party’s or witness’ safety may be compromised, the party for whose protection the suppression order is to be made is to be given the benefit of that doubt. (g) the fact that the contemplated outcome may never occur is not fatal to a finding that an order is necessary.   in the event that there is even some doubt that a party’s or witness’ safety may be compromised, the party for whose protection the suppression order is to be made is to be given the benefit of that doubt. (g) the fact that the contemplated outcome may never occur is not fatal to a finding that an order is necessary.   the fact that the contemplated outcome may never occur is not fatal to a finding that an order is necessary.   the judgment by this court under any pseudonym as approved by the chief justice pursuant to s 121(9)(g) of the family law act 1975 (cth). firstly, this provides for the primary objective of the administration of justice to safeguard the public interest in open justice by making available sufficient reasons for the orders relative to the justice of the case. secondly, it provides the context and reasons for the order sealing the file to any subsequent enquiry into discharging the suppression order. thirdly, it provides the mother with a disclosable document in support of any subsequent or consequential application she may need to make in the future. for example, an application for a suppression order with respect to the records of births, deaths and marriages (nsw) which are presumably otherwise obtainable by the father in that jurisdiction. (b) the sealed orders of this court to the mother in the limited circumstances which are obviously necessary. by making the notation referring to s 121 of the act directly below the order, it is intended to bring to the attention of any person to whom it is necessary for the mother to provide a copy of the sealed orders that their subsequent publishing or dissemination of the sealed orders may constitute an offence.   the sealed orders of this court to the mother in the limited circumstances which are obviously necessary. by making the notation referring to s 121 of the act directly below the order, it is intended to bring to the attention of any person to whom it is necessary for the mother to provide a copy of the sealed orders that their subsequent publishing or dissemination of the sealed orders may constitute an offence.
associate: dated: 1 december 2022
dated: 1 december 2022