last updated: 9 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
arness & murad [2022] fedcfamc2f 1794
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy 2] during the course of this assessment, the writer was made aware regarding the possibility of a further notification received by the department of health and human services, which may prompt an investigation into the care and wellbeing of the children. it is therefore suggested that no future alterations are made to the children’s parenting arrangements until confirmation has been received from the department of families fairness and housing regarding their potential assessment, and thus this assessment can be finalised.
... recommendations ...  5] consideration is given to maintaining the children’s current parenting arrangements until confirmation has been received from the dffh that any ongoing investigations have been completed.
dear associate, i can confirm the child protection cases for each of the children named are closed. there have been no further reports/notification to child protection since the 67z response dated 28 august 2020 was provided to the court.
it is assessed that the information provided does not meet the department’s threshold for the children being at risk of significant harm with the information previously assessed by child protection. this report will be classified as a child wellbeing report and closed at the intake phase with the formalisation of contact arrangements appropriately managed by the federal circuit court, as it then was.
in the circumstances, i can raise no concerns in relation to [the father] continuing to have contact with his children.  e mother] is a woman presenting with a mild anxiety disorder in a significant battle for control with her children’s father. there is, in my opinion, nothing in my report that should be of concern to the family court.
associate: dated: 23 december 2022
dated: 23 december 2022