last updated: 28 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
karlsson & karlsson [2022] fedcfamc2f 1604
orders
the court orders, on a final basis, that:  duly sign and execute each document as requested by the mother or her representative, including having all such documents witnessed by a qualified witness where required, (b) return all such documents in original form, duly signed, executed and witnessed, to the mother or her representative.   return all such documents in original form, duly signed, executed and witnessed, to the mother or her representative.
reasons for judgment
judge m neville:
introduction
the current arrangements and the competing applications
principles to be applied and procedure to be followed   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
the material relied on by the parties  mother’s case outline document, filed 28 june 2021. (b) father’s case outline document, 29 june 2021. (c) independent children’s case outline document, filed 25 june 2021. (d) initiating application filed by the mother on 4 december 2017. (e) response, filed by the father on 22 january 2018. (f) mother’s affidavit filed 31 may 2021. (g) father’s affidavit filed 22 january 2018. (h) child dispute conference memorandum, 30 january 2018. (i) child inclusive conference memorandum, 6 april 2021.   father’s case outline document, 29 june 2021. (c) independent children’s case outline document, filed 25 june 2021. (d) initiating application filed by the mother on 4 december 2017. (e) response, filed by the father on 22 january 2018. (f) mother’s affidavit filed 31 may 2021. (g) father’s affidavit filed 22 january 2018. (h) child dispute conference memorandum, 30 january 2018. (i) child inclusive conference memorandum, 6 april 2021.   independent children’s case outline document, filed 25 june 2021. (d) initiating application filed by the mother on 4 december 2017. (e) response, filed by the father on 22 january 2018. (f) mother’s affidavit filed 31 may 2021. (g) father’s affidavit filed 22 january 2018. (h) child dispute conference memorandum, 30 january 2018. (i) child inclusive conference memorandum, 6 april 2021.   initiating application filed by the mother on 4 december 2017. (e) response, filed by the father on 22 january 2018. (f) mother’s affidavit filed 31 may 2021. (g) father’s affidavit filed 22 january 2018. (h) child dispute conference memorandum, 30 january 2018. (i) child inclusive conference memorandum, 6 april 2021.   response, filed by the father on 22 january 2018. (f) mother’s affidavit filed 31 may 2021. (g) father’s affidavit filed 22 january 2018. (h) child dispute conference memorandum, 30 january 2018. (i) child inclusive conference memorandum, 6 april 2021.   mother’s affidavit filed 31 may 2021. (g) father’s affidavit filed 22 january 2018. (h) child dispute conference memorandum, 30 january 2018. (i) child inclusive conference memorandum, 6 april 2021.   father’s affidavit filed 22 january 2018. (h) child dispute conference memorandum, 30 january 2018. (i) child inclusive conference memorandum, 6 april 2021.   child dispute conference memorandum, 30 january 2018. (i) child inclusive conference memorandum, 6 april 2021.   child inclusive conference memorandum, 6 april 2021.
background  mr m, born in 2004, (b) x, born in 2007, and (c) y, born in 2008.   x, born in 2007, and (c) y, born in 2008.   y, born in 2008.   on 28 june 2021, the father made an application to adjourn the final hearing. for reasons given on the day, that application was refused. (b) on 29 june 2021: (i) i heard the father’s application that i recuse myself. for reasons given on the day, that application was refused. (ii) i heard the father’s application for leave to amend his response. for reasons given on the day, that application was refused. (iii) i heard the father’s application for leave to rely on his affidavit filed on 22 january 2018 and his affidavit made and served on 29 june 2021. for reasons given on the day, i granted leave to the father to rely on his affidavit of 22 january 2018 and i refused leave in relation to the affidavit made and served on 29 june 2021. (iv) i heard the independent children’s lawyer’s application to proceed undefended. for reasons given on the day, i granted that application and determined the matter would proceed by way of submissions on the evidence.   on 29 june 2021: (i) i heard the father’s application that i recuse myself. for reasons given on the day, that application was refused. (ii) i heard the father’s application for leave to amend his response. for reasons given on the day, that application was refused. (iii) i heard the father’s application for leave to rely on his affidavit filed on 22 january 2018 and his affidavit made and served on 29 june 2021. for reasons given on the day, i granted leave to the father to rely on his affidavit of 22 january 2018 and i refused leave in relation to the affidavit made and served on 29 june 2021. (iv) i heard the independent children’s lawyer’s application to proceed undefended. for reasons given on the day, i granted that application and determined the matter would proceed by way of submissions on the evidence.   i heard the father’s application that i recuse myself. for reasons given on the day, that application was refused. (ii) i heard the father’s application for leave to amend his response. for reasons given on the day, that application was refused. (iii) i heard the father’s application for leave to rely on his affidavit filed on 22 january 2018 and his affidavit made and served on 29 june 2021. for reasons given on the day, i granted leave to the father to rely on his affidavit of 22 january 2018 and i refused leave in relation to the affidavit made and served on 29 june 2021. (iv) i heard the independent children’s lawyer’s application to proceed undefended. for reasons given on the day, i granted that application and determined the matter would proceed by way of submissions on the evidence.  ) i heard the father’s application for leave to amend his response. for reasons given on the day, that application was refused. (iii) i heard the father’s application for leave to rely on his affidavit filed on 22 january 2018 and his affidavit made and served on 29 june 2021. for reasons given on the day, i granted leave to the father to rely on his affidavit of 22 january 2018 and i refused leave in relation to the affidavit made and served on 29 june 2021. (iv) i heard the independent children’s lawyer’s application to proceed undefended. for reasons given on the day, i granted that application and determined the matter would proceed by way of submissions on the evidence.  i) i heard the father’s application for leave to rely on his affidavit filed on 22 january 2018 and his affidavit made and served on 29 june 2021. for reasons given on the day, i granted leave to the father to rely on his affidavit of 22 january 2018 and i refused leave in relation to the affidavit made and served on 29 june 2021. (iv) i heard the independent children’s lawyer’s application to proceed undefended. for reasons given on the day, i granted that application and determined the matter would proceed by way of submissions on the evidence.  ) i heard the independent children’s lawyer’s application to proceed undefended. for reasons given on the day, i granted that application and determined the matter would proceed by way of submissions on the evidence.   if required, each of the mother and the father may be cross-examined, (b) cross-examination would be restricted to matters arising on the affidavit evidence before the court, and (c) each party would have 45 minutes to ask any questions in cross-examination and each party would have 30 minutes for submissions.   cross-examination would be restricted to matters arising on the affidavit evidence before the court, and (c) each party would have 45 minutes to ask any questions in cross-examination and each party would have 30 minutes for submissions.   each party would have 45 minutes to ask any questions in cross-examination and each party would have 30 minutes for submissions.
the way in which the parties put their cases
the independent children’s lawyer
the mother
the father
determining the children’s best interests: the evidence  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with each parent, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.   whilst there was some controversy about the extent to which the father had met his child support obligations, no party submitted – and the evidence does not suggest – that the matters at s 60cc(3)(ca) are relevant to the determination of the children’s best interests. (b) no party submitted, and the evidence does not suggest, that there is any practical difficulty or expense of the children spending time with or communicating with the father and so the matters at s 60cc(3)(e) are not relevant to the determination of the children’s best interests. (c) no party submitted – and the evidence does not suggest – that the matters set out at s 60cc(3)(g), namely the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the children or of either of their parents, and, or any other characteristics of the children are relevant to the determination of the children’s best interests. (d) given that the children are not aboriginal children or torres strait islander children, the considerations at s 60cc(3)(h) are not applicable to the determination of their best interests.   no party submitted, and the evidence does not suggest, that there is any practical difficulty or expense of the children spending time with or communicating with the father and so the matters at s 60cc(3)(e) are not relevant to the determination of the children’s best interests. (c) no party submitted – and the evidence does not suggest – that the matters set out at s 60cc(3)(g), namely the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the children or of either of their parents, and, or any other characteristics of the children are relevant to the determination of the children’s best interests. (d) given that the children are not aboriginal children or torres strait islander children, the considerations at s 60cc(3)(h) are not applicable to the determination of their best interests.   no party submitted – and the evidence does not suggest – that the matters set out at s 60cc(3)(g), namely the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the children or of either of their parents, and, or any other characteristics of the children are relevant to the determination of the children’s best interests. (d) given that the children are not aboriginal children or torres strait islander children, the considerations at s 60cc(3)(h) are not applicable to the determination of their best interests.   given that the children are not aboriginal children or torres strait islander children, the considerations at s 60cc(3)(h) are not applicable to the determination of their best interests.   the children’s relationships with their parents and other important people, (b) the children’s views and the weight to be given to them, (c) parental capacity and participation (including the capacity of each parent to meet the children’s needs, the extent to which each parent has taken the opportunity to spend time with, communicate with and participate in decision making for the children, and each parent’s attitude to the responsibilities of parenthood), (d) the likely effect of a change in the children’s circumstances. (e) any family violence and the need – if any – to protect the children. (f) the impact of further litigation and whether it is preferable to make the order that is least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.   the children’s views and the weight to be given to them, (c) parental capacity and participation (including the capacity of each parent to meet the children’s needs, the extent to which each parent has taken the opportunity to spend time with, communicate with and participate in decision making for the children, and each parent’s attitude to the responsibilities of parenthood), (d) the likely effect of a change in the children’s circumstances. (e) any family violence and the need – if any – to protect the children. (f) the impact of further litigation and whether it is preferable to make the order that is least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.   parental capacity and participation (including the capacity of each parent to meet the children’s needs, the extent to which each parent has taken the opportunity to spend time with, communicate with and participate in decision making for the children, and each parent’s attitude to the responsibilities of parenthood), (d) the likely effect of a change in the children’s circumstances. (e) any family violence and the need – if any – to protect the children. (f) the impact of further litigation and whether it is preferable to make the order that is least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.   the likely effect of a change in the children’s circumstances. (e) any family violence and the need – if any – to protect the children. (f) the impact of further litigation and whether it is preferable to make the order that is least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.   any family violence and the need – if any – to protect the children. (f) the impact of further litigation and whether it is preferable to make the order that is least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.   the impact of further litigation and whether it is preferable to make the order that is least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings.
the children’s relationships with their parents and other important people
with the mother
with the father
events from separation in december 2015 until february 2017
i won’t be able to be here for christmas, i need to go to the [country o] for the baby’s birth. i love you very much. i have to be at the baby’s birth. there is only one birth, but there will be lots of christmas. i am not replacing you. i love you very much.
events from early 2017 to the commencement of the proceedings on 4 december 2017
discussion of events leading up to the commencement of the proceedings  the children experienced the breakdown of their family unit in december 2015. the father left the former family home and the children’s time and communication with him was not consistent or regular, and did not include overnight time. (b) the father had departed for the country o in early 2016 for a three month trip. in mid 2016, before his return, they learned that he had father had formed a new relationship with ms p. this news was delivered over facetime, and to the extent that the children were – on the father’s evidence – surprised and a little upset, he was not physically present to provide them with any comfort. (c) within two weeks or so of learning the father had embarked on a new relationship, he introduced ms p to them. (d) three months later, the children learned their father was having a baby with ms p. at or around the time they received the news, the father travelled to the country o for two weeks and was again absent. (e) the children spent school holiday time with him in september/october 2016. about six weeks later, they learned that the father would be away for christmas – the first time since separation. (f) in late 2016, he departed for the country o again and was gone from their lives for two months. (g) when the father returned in early 2017, ms p and baby n came with him.   the father had departed for the country o in early 2016 for a three month trip. in mid 2016, before his return, they learned that he had father had formed a new relationship with ms p. this news was delivered over facetime, and to the extent that the children were – on the father’s evidence – surprised and a little upset, he was not physically present to provide them with any comfort. (c) within two weeks or so of learning the father had embarked on a new relationship, he introduced ms p to them. (d) three months later, the children learned their father was having a baby with ms p. at or around the time they received the news, the father travelled to the country o for two weeks and was again absent. (e) the children spent school holiday time with him in september/october 2016. about six weeks later, they learned that the father would be away for christmas – the first time since separation. (f) in late 2016, he departed for the country o again and was gone from their lives for two months. (g) when the father returned in early 2017, ms p and baby n came with him.   within two weeks or so of learning the father had embarked on a new relationship, he introduced ms p to them. (d) three months later, the children learned their father was having a baby with ms p. at or around the time they received the news, the father travelled to the country o for two weeks and was again absent. (e) the children spent school holiday time with him in september/october 2016. about six weeks later, they learned that the father would be away for christmas – the first time since separation. (f) in late 2016, he departed for the country o again and was gone from their lives for two months. (g) when the father returned in early 2017, ms p and baby n came with him.   three months later, the children learned their father was having a baby with ms p. at or around the time they received the news, the father travelled to the country o for two weeks and was again absent. (e) the children spent school holiday time with him in september/october 2016. about six weeks later, they learned that the father would be away for christmas – the first time since separation. (f) in late 2016, he departed for the country o again and was gone from their lives for two months. (g) when the father returned in early 2017, ms p and baby n came with him.   the children spent school holiday time with him in september/october 2016. about six weeks later, they learned that the father would be away for christmas – the first time since separation. (f) in late 2016, he departed for the country o again and was gone from their lives for two months. (g) when the father returned in early 2017, ms p and baby n came with him.   in late 2016, he departed for the country o again and was gone from their lives for two months. (g) when the father returned in early 2017, ms p and baby n came with him.   when the father returned in early 2017, ms p and baby n came with him.
events occurring after the parenting proceedings were underway
the children’s views and the weight to be given to them
x and y’s views as reflected through the independent children’s lawyer
meeting in april 2018
statement of views and wishes, november 2019
i met with [the independent children’s lawyer] today and we talked about whether i would like to make a written statement and i thought i would. it is ok for [the independent children’s lawyer] to type it for me. i am telling her what to write. about dad, i don’t want to start seeing him again. if i change my mind i will tell my mum. i just remember him always shouting.
i met with [the independent children’s lawyer] today. we talked about my wishes and views and why we should give them if we wanted to. i found out why we should do it and the reasons and the reason why mum was seeking a sole parental responsibility order, and [the independent children’s lawyer] asked me whether i wanted to see dad. i said it was ok to do a statement and she typed it for me as i said it. i’m happy living with mum and i don’t really want to change that. things are going well. we just started [sports] again. [x] is about to go to his new school. i’m going into year 6 next year. everything is pretty good right now, and there is nothing that i would like to change. i don’t really want to communicate with dad. he wasn’t the best parent. we didn’t do much with him and we were usually always late to things. he usually swore and raised his voice a lot and we started to stop seeing him and started living with mum. dad got angry but we were happy living with mum and stayed that way. mum has always encouraged us to communicate with dad. we’ve been the ones to say no, and not her. she is not the one saying we shouldn’t see dad. if i changed my mind in the future and wanted to communicate with dad, i know that mum would be happy to help me do that.
the child inclusive conference
x: aged 13 years and 11 months  he would not participate in family therapy, even if court ordered. he was reported to have asserted that he is an adult, and capable of determining for himself whether he has a relationship with his father. (b) he would not comply with any court order to spend time with his father. (c) he wanted his father to leave him and siblings alone.   he would not comply with any court order to spend time with his father. (c) he wanted his father to leave him and siblings alone.   he wanted his father to leave him and siblings alone.
y: aged 12½ years
mr m’s views
conclusions about the children’s views
parental capacity and participation
evidence about communication about making arrangements for time between the children and the father
evidence about exercising parental responsibility
insight into the children’s needs
conclusions
the impact of change on the children
any family violence and the need – if any – to protect the children
the impact of further litigation
determing the children’s best interests: discussion
what orders, then, should be made?
where should the children live?
what orders should be made about time and communication?  the children shall only spend time with the father as agreed between the parties, taking into account each child’s current views and wishes, and (b) should x and/or y express a wish to spend time with or communicate with the father, then the mother will facilitate such time and communication as may be agreed between the parties.   should x and/or y express a wish to spend time with or communicate with the father, then the mother will facilitate such time and communication as may be agreed between the parties.   that x and y shall each spend time with the father as agreed between the parties taking into account each child's views and wishes, and (b) in the event either x or y express a wish to spend time or communicate with the father in the future, the mother is to do all acts and things necessary to arrange such time and/or communication.   in the event either x or y express a wish to spend time or communicate with the father in the future, the mother is to do all acts and things necessary to arrange such time and/or communication.
parental responsibility
equal shared parental responsibility  the decision to be made jointly by the parents, and (b) each parent to consult the other in relation to the decision to be made about the issue, and (c) each parent to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.[3]   each parent to consult the other in relation to the decision to be made about the issue, and (c) each parent to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.[3]   each parent to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.[3]
is an order about parental responsibility required?
what order, then, should be made about parental responsibility?
orders about travel
the father’s application for ancillary orders  each parent keep the other notified of the children’s contact details, (b) each parent keep the other informed if the children suffer a serious illness or injury, and each inform the other of significant medical, dental and therapeutic treatment provided to the children and that each parent be entitled to attend such appointments, (c) each parent be entitled to obtain information from the children’s schools about their educational information and progress, (d) each parent be at liberty to attend school functions and events and extra-curricular activities, (e) each parent be listed as an emergency contact person at the children’s schools, (f) prevent either parent from enrolling the children in activities that would impinge on the time the children spend with the other parent, and (g) restrain each parent from denigrating the other.   each parent keep the other informed if the children suffer a serious illness or injury, and each inform the other of significant medical, dental and therapeutic treatment provided to the children and that each parent be entitled to attend such appointments, (c) each parent be entitled to obtain information from the children’s schools about their educational information and progress, (d) each parent be at liberty to attend school functions and events and extra-curricular activities, (e) each parent be listed as an emergency contact person at the children’s schools, (f) prevent either parent from enrolling the children in activities that would impinge on the time the children spend with the other parent, and (g) restrain each parent from denigrating the other.   each parent be entitled to obtain information from the children’s schools about their educational information and progress, (d) each parent be at liberty to attend school functions and events and extra-curricular activities, (e) each parent be listed as an emergency contact person at the children’s schools, (f) prevent either parent from enrolling the children in activities that would impinge on the time the children spend with the other parent, and (g) restrain each parent from denigrating the other.   each parent be at liberty to attend school functions and events and extra-curricular activities, (e) each parent be listed as an emergency contact person at the children’s schools, (f) prevent either parent from enrolling the children in activities that would impinge on the time the children spend with the other parent, and (g) restrain each parent from denigrating the other.   each parent be listed as an emergency contact person at the children’s schools, (f) prevent either parent from enrolling the children in activities that would impinge on the time the children spend with the other parent, and (g) restrain each parent from denigrating the other.   prevent either parent from enrolling the children in activities that would impinge on the time the children spend with the other parent, and (g) restrain each parent from denigrating the other.   restrain each parent from denigrating the other.   the letters sent by the father to the children have included his contact details. the children are all old enough to have mobile phones and should they wish to initiate contact with the father, i consider that they have sufficient information to enable them to do that independently. i do not consider an order is required in this respect. (b) where the children are resistant to spending time or communicating with the father, i consider that the orders he seeks about information being provided to him about their medical conditions (even if serious) and treatment, or about his attendance at their appointments, would be perceived as intrusive by the children and is not in their best interests. (c) i consider that an order that the father be entitled to obtain information about the children’s educational progress is not consistent with their views about the relationship they wish to have with him. having regard to the children’s ages and stages of development, i consider it is unnecessarily intrusive and is not in their best interests. (d) an order that each parent be at liberty to attend school functions and events and extra-curricular activities also appears to be inconsistent with the children’s views about the relationship they want to have with the father. to date, there have been no orders to preclude the father’s attendance, but the father gave no evidence of having made any attempt to attend such occasions or events. i do not consider such an order is necessary now or that it would be in the children’s best interests that it be made. (e) an order that each parent be listed as an emergency contact person at the children’s school would, in my view, be potentially harmful to the children. where they do not wish to have communication with him, his attendance upon them in an emergency situation could be distressing to them. (f) the orders made about time and parental responsibility obviate the need to make orders restraining either parent from enrolling the children in extra-curricular activities. (g) having regard to the extent to which the children have been exposed to the parental conflict to date, i consider that any order now seeking to restrain one parent from denigrating the other will serve no purpose.   where the children are resistant to spending time or communicating with the father, i consider that the orders he seeks about information being provided to him about their medical conditions (even if serious) and treatment, or about his attendance at their appointments, would be perceived as intrusive by the children and is not in their best interests. (c) i consider that an order that the father be entitled to obtain information about the children’s educational progress is not consistent with their views about the relationship they wish to have with him. having regard to the children’s ages and stages of development, i consider it is unnecessarily intrusive and is not in their best interests. (d) an order that each parent be at liberty to attend school functions and events and extra-curricular activities also appears to be inconsistent with the children’s views about the relationship they want to have with the father. to date, there have been no orders to preclude the father’s attendance, but the father gave no evidence of having made any attempt to attend such occasions or events. i do not consider such an order is necessary now or that it would be in the children’s best interests that it be made. (e) an order that each parent be listed as an emergency contact person at the children’s school would, in my view, be potentially harmful to the children. where they do not wish to have communication with him, his attendance upon them in an emergency situation could be distressing to them. (f) the orders made about time and parental responsibility obviate the need to make orders restraining either parent from enrolling the children in extra-curricular activities. (g) having regard to the extent to which the children have been exposed to the parental conflict to date, i consider that any order now seeking to restrain one parent from denigrating the other will serve no purpose.   i consider that an order that the father be entitled to obtain information about the children’s educational progress is not consistent with their views about the relationship they wish to have with him. having regard to the children’s ages and stages of development, i consider it is unnecessarily intrusive and is not in their best interests. (d) an order that each parent be at liberty to attend school functions and events and extra-curricular activities also appears to be inconsistent with the children’s views about the relationship they want to have with the father. to date, there have been no orders to preclude the father’s attendance, but the father gave no evidence of having made any attempt to attend such occasions or events. i do not consider such an order is necessary now or that it would be in the children’s best interests that it be made. (e) an order that each parent be listed as an emergency contact person at the children’s school would, in my view, be potentially harmful to the children. where they do not wish to have communication with him, his attendance upon them in an emergency situation could be distressing to them. (f) the orders made about time and parental responsibility obviate the need to make orders restraining either parent from enrolling the children in extra-curricular activities. (g) having regard to the extent to which the children have been exposed to the parental conflict to date, i consider that any order now seeking to restrain one parent from denigrating the other will serve no purpose.   an order that each parent be at liberty to attend school functions and events and extra-curricular activities also appears to be inconsistent with the children’s views about the relationship they want to have with the father. to date, there have been no orders to preclude the father’s attendance, but the father gave no evidence of having made any attempt to attend such occasions or events. i do not consider such an order is necessary now or that it would be in the children’s best interests that it be made. (e) an order that each parent be listed as an emergency contact person at the children’s school would, in my view, be potentially harmful to the children. where they do not wish to have communication with him, his attendance upon them in an emergency situation could be distressing to them. (f) the orders made about time and parental responsibility obviate the need to make orders restraining either parent from enrolling the children in extra-curricular activities. (g) having regard to the extent to which the children have been exposed to the parental conflict to date, i consider that any order now seeking to restrain one parent from denigrating the other will serve no purpose.   an order that each parent be listed as an emergency contact person at the children’s school would, in my view, be potentially harmful to the children. where they do not wish to have communication with him, his attendance upon them in an emergency situation could be distressing to them. (f) the orders made about time and parental responsibility obviate the need to make orders restraining either parent from enrolling the children in extra-curricular activities. (g) having regard to the extent to which the children have been exposed to the parental conflict to date, i consider that any order now seeking to restrain one parent from denigrating the other will serve no purpose.   the orders made about time and parental responsibility obviate the need to make orders restraining either parent from enrolling the children in extra-curricular activities. (g) having regard to the extent to which the children have been exposed to the parental conflict to date, i consider that any order now seeking to restrain one parent from denigrating the other will serve no purpose.   having regard to the extent to which the children have been exposed to the parental conflict to date, i consider that any order now seeking to restrain one parent from denigrating the other will serve no purpose.
the independent children’s lawyer’s application for costs
conclusion
associate: dated: 14 december 2022
dated: 14 december 2022
schedule one: mother’s minute of order
schedule two: father’s minute of order
schedule three: independent children’s lawyer’s minute of order
[1] mother’s trial affidavit, 31/05/2021: ann w19. [2] mother’s trial affidavit, 31/05/2021: ann w22.[3] section 65dac.