last updated: 28 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
karlsson & karlsson (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc2f 1714
orders
the court orders that:  the funds presently held on behalf of the parties in the trust account of c lawyers, and (b) to the extent that those funds are insufficient to satisfy the costs order, then the balance is to be paid by the husband personally.   to the extent that those funds are insufficient to satisfy the costs order, then the balance is to be paid by the husband personally.
reasons for judgment
judge m neville:
introduction
background
applicable law and principles  the court does not need to be satisfied that there special circumstances, an exceptional case or otherwise a “clear case” for the making of costs order. a finding of justifying circumstances is, however, an essential preliminary to the making of a costs order: penfold v penfold [1980] hca 4, (1980) 144 clr 311, jensen & jensen [1982] famca 57, (1982) flc 91-263. (b) the court’s discretion in relation to the issue of costs is broad: collins & collins [1985] famca 5, (1985) flc 91-602. (c) the weight to be given to a particular matter under s 117(2a) falls within the court’s discretion. there is no requirement under s 117 that one factor must be present before an order for costs is made, nor that one factor be of comparative weight to the other factors set out at s 117(2a). there is nothing to prevent one factor from being the sole foundation for an order for costs, nor to prevent one factor from being determinative of the application for costs: fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania) v fish and another [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123. (d) notwithstanding the court’s discretion as to the weight to be given to each of the factors at s 117(2a), all of the factors must be taken into account and balanced in order to determine whether the overall circumstances justify the making of an order for costs: i & i (no 2) (1995) flc 92-625. (e) costs are not to be awarded by way of punishment of the unsuccessful party. costs are compensatory in the sense that they are awarded to indemnify the successful party against the expense to which they have been put by reason of the legal proceedings: latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59, (1990) 170 clr 534.   the court’s discretion in relation to the issue of costs is broad: collins & collins [1985] famca 5, (1985) flc 91-602. (c) the weight to be given to a particular matter under s 117(2a) falls within the court’s discretion. there is no requirement under s 117 that one factor must be present before an order for costs is made, nor that one factor be of comparative weight to the other factors set out at s 117(2a). there is nothing to prevent one factor from being the sole foundation for an order for costs, nor to prevent one factor from being determinative of the application for costs: fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania) v fish and another [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123. (d) notwithstanding the court’s discretion as to the weight to be given to each of the factors at s 117(2a), all of the factors must be taken into account and balanced in order to determine whether the overall circumstances justify the making of an order for costs: i & i (no 2) (1995) flc 92-625. (e) costs are not to be awarded by way of punishment of the unsuccessful party. costs are compensatory in the sense that they are awarded to indemnify the successful party against the expense to which they have been put by reason of the legal proceedings: latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59, (1990) 170 clr 534.   the weight to be given to a particular matter under s 117(2a) falls within the court’s discretion. there is no requirement under s 117 that one factor must be present before an order for costs is made, nor that one factor be of comparative weight to the other factors set out at s 117(2a). there is nothing to prevent one factor from being the sole foundation for an order for costs, nor to prevent one factor from being determinative of the application for costs: fitzgerald (as child representative for a (legal aid commission of tasmania) v fish and another [2005] famca 158, (2005) 33 fam lr 123. (d) notwithstanding the court’s discretion as to the weight to be given to each of the factors at s 117(2a), all of the factors must be taken into account and balanced in order to determine whether the overall circumstances justify the making of an order for costs: i & i (no 2) (1995) flc 92-625. (e) costs are not to be awarded by way of punishment of the unsuccessful party. costs are compensatory in the sense that they are awarded to indemnify the successful party against the expense to which they have been put by reason of the legal proceedings: latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59, (1990) 170 clr 534.   notwithstanding the court’s discretion as to the weight to be given to each of the factors at s 117(2a), all of the factors must be taken into account and balanced in order to determine whether the overall circumstances justify the making of an order for costs: i & i (no 2) (1995) flc 92-625. (e) costs are not to be awarded by way of punishment of the unsuccessful party. costs are compensatory in the sense that they are awarded to indemnify the successful party against the expense to which they have been put by reason of the legal proceedings: latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59, (1990) 170 clr 534.   costs are not to be awarded by way of punishment of the unsuccessful party. costs are compensatory in the sense that they are awarded to indemnify the successful party against the expense to which they have been put by reason of the legal proceedings: latoudis v casey [1990] hca 59, (1990) 170 clr 534.   in an appropriate case, the court has a discretion to order costs on an indemnity basis and such costs may be ordered where they have been incurred under a costs agreement which departs from the usual scale of costs, (b) it is fundamental to the exercise of the discretion to order indemnity costs that the trial judge should understand that such an order is a very great departure from the normal standard, (c) it is also fundamental to the exercise of the discretion that the trial judge know what the terms of the costs agreement are, the extent to which it exceeds the scale costs and what its likely impact will be on the financial position of each of the parties. (d) the degree to which a costs agreement departs from the established norm and the actual financial significance of such a departure may itself be a reason for not ordering costs on an indemnity basis. (e) insofar as an offer of compromise not accepted is better than what was ultimately ordered, the general practice in the family law jurisdiction has been to order no more than costs on a party and party basis. (f) a party who enters into a costs agreement should, if properly advised, contemplate that they might have to bear their own costs, and that even if they succeed in the litigation and obtain an order for costs, they should not expect to receive an award of costs on an indemnity basis. a party, so advised, must therefore have been prepared to assume those risks upon entering into the costs agreement.   it is fundamental to the exercise of the discretion to order indemnity costs that the trial judge should understand that such an order is a very great departure from the normal standard, (c) it is also fundamental to the exercise of the discretion that the trial judge know what the terms of the costs agreement are, the extent to which it exceeds the scale costs and what its likely impact will be on the financial position of each of the parties. (d) the degree to which a costs agreement departs from the established norm and the actual financial significance of such a departure may itself be a reason for not ordering costs on an indemnity basis. (e) insofar as an offer of compromise not accepted is better than what was ultimately ordered, the general practice in the family law jurisdiction has been to order no more than costs on a party and party basis. (f) a party who enters into a costs agreement should, if properly advised, contemplate that they might have to bear their own costs, and that even if they succeed in the litigation and obtain an order for costs, they should not expect to receive an award of costs on an indemnity basis. a party, so advised, must therefore have been prepared to assume those risks upon entering into the costs agreement.   it is also fundamental to the exercise of the discretion that the trial judge know what the terms of the costs agreement are, the extent to which it exceeds the scale costs and what its likely impact will be on the financial position of each of the parties. (d) the degree to which a costs agreement departs from the established norm and the actual financial significance of such a departure may itself be a reason for not ordering costs on an indemnity basis. (e) insofar as an offer of compromise not accepted is better than what was ultimately ordered, the general practice in the family law jurisdiction has been to order no more than costs on a party and party basis. (f) a party who enters into a costs agreement should, if properly advised, contemplate that they might have to bear their own costs, and that even if they succeed in the litigation and obtain an order for costs, they should not expect to receive an award of costs on an indemnity basis. a party, so advised, must therefore have been prepared to assume those risks upon entering into the costs agreement.   the degree to which a costs agreement departs from the established norm and the actual financial significance of such a departure may itself be a reason for not ordering costs on an indemnity basis. (e) insofar as an offer of compromise not accepted is better than what was ultimately ordered, the general practice in the family law jurisdiction has been to order no more than costs on a party and party basis. (f) a party who enters into a costs agreement should, if properly advised, contemplate that they might have to bear their own costs, and that even if they succeed in the litigation and obtain an order for costs, they should not expect to receive an award of costs on an indemnity basis. a party, so advised, must therefore have been prepared to assume those risks upon entering into the costs agreement.   insofar as an offer of compromise not accepted is better than what was ultimately ordered, the general practice in the family law jurisdiction has been to order no more than costs on a party and party basis. (f) a party who enters into a costs agreement should, if properly advised, contemplate that they might have to bear their own costs, and that even if they succeed in the litigation and obtain an order for costs, they should not expect to receive an award of costs on an indemnity basis. a party, so advised, must therefore have been prepared to assume those risks upon entering into the costs agreement.   a party who enters into a costs agreement should, if properly advised, contemplate that they might have to bear their own costs, and that even if they succeed in the litigation and obtain an order for costs, they should not expect to receive an award of costs on an indemnity basis. a party, so advised, must therefore have been prepared to assume those risks upon entering into the costs agreement.   the term “indemnity costs” is understood to be an entitlement to costs, including under a costs agreement, for all costs incurred, other than costs that are unreasonable in amount or that have been incurred unreasonably. (b) imprudence by a party in their “approach” such as the refusal of an offer to compromise is not sufficient in and of itself to enliven the power to award indemnity costs, although it may provide a basis for a costs order. (c) there is no rule that indemnity costs will be ordered where the losing party was guilty of ethical or moral delinquency in the antecedent facts which have given rise to the litigation.   imprudence by a party in their “approach” such as the refusal of an offer to compromise is not sufficient in and of itself to enliven the power to award indemnity costs, although it may provide a basis for a costs order. (c) there is no rule that indemnity costs will be ordered where the losing party was guilty of ethical or moral delinquency in the antecedent facts which have given rise to the litigation.   there is no rule that indemnity costs will be ordered where the losing party was guilty of ethical or moral delinquency in the antecedent facts which have given rise to the litigation.   where it appears that an action has been commenced or continued in circumstances where a party properly advised should have known that he had no chance of success. in such cases the action must be presumed to have been commenced or continued for some ulterior motive or because of some wilful disregard of the known facts (see fountain selected meats pty ltd v international produce merchants pty ltd (1988) 81 alr 397) (b) making allegations of fraud, knowing them to be false, and the making of the relevant allegations of fraud (see fountain selected meats pty ltd (supra)). (c) evidence of particular misconduct causing loss of time to the court and to other parties (see tetijo holdings pty ltd v keeprite australia pty ltd [1991] fca 225). (d) the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (see ragata developments pty ltd v westpac banking corporation [1993] fca 115). (e) an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise.   making allegations of fraud, knowing them to be false, and the making of the relevant allegations of fraud (see fountain selected meats pty ltd (supra)). (c) evidence of particular misconduct causing loss of time to the court and to other parties (see tetijo holdings pty ltd v keeprite australia pty ltd [1991] fca 225). (d) the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (see ragata developments pty ltd v westpac banking corporation [1993] fca 115). (e) an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise.   evidence of particular misconduct causing loss of time to the court and to other parties (see tetijo holdings pty ltd v keeprite australia pty ltd [1991] fca 225). (d) the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (see ragata developments pty ltd v westpac banking corporation [1993] fca 115). (e) an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise.   the making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (see ragata developments pty ltd v westpac banking corporation [1993] fca 115). (e) an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise.   an imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise.
material relied upon  wife’s written submissions, 20 november 2020. (b) wife’s bundle of supporting documents, comprising: (i) wife’s costs agreement with mills oakley, 21 june 2017, (ii) itemised statement of professional fees and disbursements for the period 11 june 2018 to 25 june 2018, issued (inferentially) by mills oakley to the wife, (iii) wife’s costs agreement with barkus doolan, 18 september 2018, (iv) counsel’s fee disclosure, 22 july 2019, (v) itemised schedule of professional fees and disbursements, tax invoices, and trust account statements for the period 14 january 2019 to 29 january 2020, issued (inferentially) by barkus doolan (including counsel’s fees of $14,960 incl gst), (vi) offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, or the wife’s solicitor and the husband during the period 21 march 2019 to 20 september 2019. (c) husband’s written submissions, 25 june 2021. (d) annexures to the husband’s written submissions comprising: (i) offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, later, when the husband was self-represented, between him and the wife’s solicitor, during the period 21 march 2019 to 3 september 2019. (ii) correspondence between the parties’ solicitors and, later, when the husband was self-represented, between him and the wife’s solicitor, concerning preparation for final hearing, (iii) schedule of the husband’s legal costs. (e) husband’s e-mail, incorporating further brief submissions and attaching documents, sent 28 june 2021. (f) documents annexed to husband’s e-mail sent 28 june 2021, namely: (i) financial statement, (ii) e-mail from mr v, 7 september 2017, and (iii) e-mails exchanged between the husband and two real estate agents in august 2017 in relation to market appraisals of the property a property.   wife’s bundle of supporting documents, comprising: (i) wife’s costs agreement with mills oakley, 21 june 2017, (ii) itemised statement of professional fees and disbursements for the period 11 june 2018 to 25 june 2018, issued (inferentially) by mills oakley to the wife, (iii) wife’s costs agreement with barkus doolan, 18 september 2018, (iv) counsel’s fee disclosure, 22 july 2019, (v) itemised schedule of professional fees and disbursements, tax invoices, and trust account statements for the period 14 january 2019 to 29 january 2020, issued (inferentially) by barkus doolan (including counsel’s fees of $14,960 incl gst), (vi) offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, or the wife’s solicitor and the husband during the period 21 march 2019 to 20 september 2019. (c) husband’s written submissions, 25 june 2021. (d) annexures to the husband’s written submissions comprising: (i) offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, later, when the husband was self-represented, between him and the wife’s solicitor, during the period 21 march 2019 to 3 september 2019. (ii) correspondence between the parties’ solicitors and, later, when the husband was self-represented, between him and the wife’s solicitor, concerning preparation for final hearing, (iii) schedule of the husband’s legal costs. (e) husband’s e-mail, incorporating further brief submissions and attaching documents, sent 28 june 2021. (f) documents annexed to husband’s e-mail sent 28 june 2021, namely: (i) financial statement, (ii) e-mail from mr v, 7 september 2017, and (iii) e-mails exchanged between the husband and two real estate agents in august 2017 in relation to market appraisals of the property a property.   wife’s costs agreement with mills oakley, 21 june 2017, (ii) itemised statement of professional fees and disbursements for the period 11 june 2018 to 25 june 2018, issued (inferentially) by mills oakley to the wife, (iii) wife’s costs agreement with barkus doolan, 18 september 2018, (iv) counsel’s fee disclosure, 22 july 2019, (v) itemised schedule of professional fees and disbursements, tax invoices, and trust account statements for the period 14 january 2019 to 29 january 2020, issued (inferentially) by barkus doolan (including counsel’s fees of $14,960 incl gst), (vi) offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, or the wife’s solicitor and the husband during the period 21 march 2019 to 20 september 2019.  ) itemised statement of professional fees and disbursements for the period 11 june 2018 to 25 june 2018, issued (inferentially) by mills oakley to the wife, (iii) wife’s costs agreement with barkus doolan, 18 september 2018, (iv) counsel’s fee disclosure, 22 july 2019, (v) itemised schedule of professional fees and disbursements, tax invoices, and trust account statements for the period 14 january 2019 to 29 january 2020, issued (inferentially) by barkus doolan (including counsel’s fees of $14,960 incl gst), (vi) offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, or the wife’s solicitor and the husband during the period 21 march 2019 to 20 september 2019.  i) wife’s costs agreement with barkus doolan, 18 september 2018, (iv) counsel’s fee disclosure, 22 july 2019, (v) itemised schedule of professional fees and disbursements, tax invoices, and trust account statements for the period 14 january 2019 to 29 january 2020, issued (inferentially) by barkus doolan (including counsel’s fees of $14,960 incl gst), (vi) offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, or the wife’s solicitor and the husband during the period 21 march 2019 to 20 september 2019.  ) counsel’s fee disclosure, 22 july 2019, (v) itemised schedule of professional fees and disbursements, tax invoices, and trust account statements for the period 14 january 2019 to 29 january 2020, issued (inferentially) by barkus doolan (including counsel’s fees of $14,960 incl gst), (vi) offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, or the wife’s solicitor and the husband during the period 21 march 2019 to 20 september 2019.   itemised schedule of professional fees and disbursements, tax invoices, and trust account statements for the period 14 january 2019 to 29 january 2020, issued (inferentially) by barkus doolan (including counsel’s fees of $14,960 incl gst), (vi) offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, or the wife’s solicitor and the husband during the period 21 march 2019 to 20 september 2019.  ) offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, or the wife’s solicitor and the husband during the period 21 march 2019 to 20 september 2019.   husband’s written submissions, 25 june 2021. (d) annexures to the husband’s written submissions comprising: (i) offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, later, when the husband was self-represented, between him and the wife’s solicitor, during the period 21 march 2019 to 3 september 2019. (ii) correspondence between the parties’ solicitors and, later, when the husband was self-represented, between him and the wife’s solicitor, concerning preparation for final hearing, (iii) schedule of the husband’s legal costs. (e) husband’s e-mail, incorporating further brief submissions and attaching documents, sent 28 june 2021. (f) documents annexed to husband’s e-mail sent 28 june 2021, namely: (i) financial statement, (ii) e-mail from mr v, 7 september 2017, and (iii) e-mails exchanged between the husband and two real estate agents in august 2017 in relation to market appraisals of the property a property.   annexures to the husband’s written submissions comprising: (i) offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, later, when the husband was self-represented, between him and the wife’s solicitor, during the period 21 march 2019 to 3 september 2019. (ii) correspondence between the parties’ solicitors and, later, when the husband was self-represented, between him and the wife’s solicitor, concerning preparation for final hearing, (iii) schedule of the husband’s legal costs. (e) husband’s e-mail, incorporating further brief submissions and attaching documents, sent 28 june 2021. (f) documents annexed to husband’s e-mail sent 28 june 2021, namely: (i) financial statement, (ii) e-mail from mr v, 7 september 2017, and (iii) e-mails exchanged between the husband and two real estate agents in august 2017 in relation to market appraisals of the property a property.   offers of settlement exchanged between the parties’ solicitors and, later, when the husband was self-represented, between him and the wife’s solicitor, during the period 21 march 2019 to 3 september 2019. (ii) correspondence between the parties’ solicitors and, later, when the husband was self-represented, between him and the wife’s solicitor, concerning preparation for final hearing, (iii) schedule of the husband’s legal costs.  ) correspondence between the parties’ solicitors and, later, when the husband was self-represented, between him and the wife’s solicitor, concerning preparation for final hearing, (iii) schedule of the husband’s legal costs.  i) schedule of the husband’s legal costs.   husband’s e-mail, incorporating further brief submissions and attaching documents, sent 28 june 2021. (f) documents annexed to husband’s e-mail sent 28 june 2021, namely: (i) financial statement, (ii) e-mail from mr v, 7 september 2017, and (iii) e-mails exchanged between the husband and two real estate agents in august 2017 in relation to market appraisals of the property a property.   documents annexed to husband’s e-mail sent 28 june 2021, namely: (i) financial statement, (ii) e-mail from mr v, 7 september 2017, and (iii) e-mails exchanged between the husband and two real estate agents in august 2017 in relation to market appraisals of the property a property.   financial statement, (ii) e-mail from mr v, 7 september 2017, and (iii) e-mails exchanged between the husband and two real estate agents in august 2017 in relation to market appraisals of the property a property.  ) e-mail from mr v, 7 september 2017, and (iii) e-mails exchanged between the husband and two real estate agents in august 2017 in relation to market appraisals of the property a property.  i) e-mails exchanged between the husband and two real estate agents in august 2017 in relation to market appraisals of the property a property.
the section 117(2a) factors
the parties’ financial circumstances
the wife
the husband  his receipt of the property a property was contingent upon him raising finance to discharge the mortgage over in or around june 2016. he had not raised the necessary finance by the time contracts were exchanged on the property in july 2017. to the extent that the property may have increased in value to $950,000 in the years that have passed since its sale, that does not alter the fact that he was not in a position to raise the finance necessary to have retained it for over 12 months after the orders of 29 june 2016 required him to do so, and (b) whilst, if he had raised the necessary finance and retained the property, he would not have rental costs today, he would have had the costs of servicing the loan in any event.   whilst, if he had raised the necessary finance and retained the property, he would not have rental costs today, he would have had the costs of servicing the loan in any event.
receipt of legal aid
the conduct of the parties to the proceedings  the wife’s section 79a application filed 23 september 2016 was “malicious, without basis or prospect of success and fraudulent” and withdrawn the day before the matter was before the court. (b) the wife’s application for enforcement orders in january 2017 left the husband with insufficient time to obtain legal advice before it was returned on 23 february 2017. (c) the wife’s urgent application for orders that a registrar sign the necessary documents to effect a transfer of the property a property, determined by judge henderson (as her honour then was) on 20 july 2017, was prosecuted by the wife in circumstances where the wife knew he could not be before the court, the application was not urgent, and the wife had failed to make the full and frank disclosure to the court that is required where an application is made to proceed ex parte. (d) by selling the property a property, the wife acted contrary to the orders of 23 february 2017. (e) the wife had failed to make proper disclosure and had failed to comply with the orders of 4 september 2017 requiring her to obtain a calculation of her capital gains tax liability. i note that the husband raised this contention again later in his submissions, and it will be discussed in further detail later in these reasons. (f) the wife refused his repeated requests to allow him time to refinance before selling the property a property, she refused to sign necessary documents, she refused to withdraw the property from sale in breach of orders, and she sold the property under market value in breach of court orders in a “contrived sale process”.   the wife’s application for enforcement orders in january 2017 left the husband with insufficient time to obtain legal advice before it was returned on 23 february 2017. (c) the wife’s urgent application for orders that a registrar sign the necessary documents to effect a transfer of the property a property, determined by judge henderson (as her honour then was) on 20 july 2017, was prosecuted by the wife in circumstances where the wife knew he could not be before the court, the application was not urgent, and the wife had failed to make the full and frank disclosure to the court that is required where an application is made to proceed ex parte. (d) by selling the property a property, the wife acted contrary to the orders of 23 february 2017. (e) the wife had failed to make proper disclosure and had failed to comply with the orders of 4 september 2017 requiring her to obtain a calculation of her capital gains tax liability. i note that the husband raised this contention again later in his submissions, and it will be discussed in further detail later in these reasons. (f) the wife refused his repeated requests to allow him time to refinance before selling the property a property, she refused to sign necessary documents, she refused to withdraw the property from sale in breach of orders, and she sold the property under market value in breach of court orders in a “contrived sale process”.   the wife’s urgent application for orders that a registrar sign the necessary documents to effect a transfer of the property a property, determined by judge henderson (as her honour then was) on 20 july 2017, was prosecuted by the wife in circumstances where the wife knew he could not be before the court, the application was not urgent, and the wife had failed to make the full and frank disclosure to the court that is required where an application is made to proceed ex parte. (d) by selling the property a property, the wife acted contrary to the orders of 23 february 2017. (e) the wife had failed to make proper disclosure and had failed to comply with the orders of 4 september 2017 requiring her to obtain a calculation of her capital gains tax liability. i note that the husband raised this contention again later in his submissions, and it will be discussed in further detail later in these reasons. (f) the wife refused his repeated requests to allow him time to refinance before selling the property a property, she refused to sign necessary documents, she refused to withdraw the property from sale in breach of orders, and she sold the property under market value in breach of court orders in a “contrived sale process”.   by selling the property a property, the wife acted contrary to the orders of 23 february 2017. (e) the wife had failed to make proper disclosure and had failed to comply with the orders of 4 september 2017 requiring her to obtain a calculation of her capital gains tax liability. i note that the husband raised this contention again later in his submissions, and it will be discussed in further detail later in these reasons. (f) the wife refused his repeated requests to allow him time to refinance before selling the property a property, she refused to sign necessary documents, she refused to withdraw the property from sale in breach of orders, and she sold the property under market value in breach of court orders in a “contrived sale process”.   the wife had failed to make proper disclosure and had failed to comply with the orders of 4 september 2017 requiring her to obtain a calculation of her capital gains tax liability. i note that the husband raised this contention again later in his submissions, and it will be discussed in further detail later in these reasons. (f) the wife refused his repeated requests to allow him time to refinance before selling the property a property, she refused to sign necessary documents, she refused to withdraw the property from sale in breach of orders, and she sold the property under market value in breach of court orders in a “contrived sale process”.   the wife refused his repeated requests to allow him time to refinance before selling the property a property, she refused to sign necessary documents, she refused to withdraw the property from sale in breach of orders, and she sold the property under market value in breach of court orders in a “contrived sale process”.  ] so what the husband offered to do on 19 july 2017 is, “i have a conditional notice of approval for refinance from [bank]. let me take this property over”, was an offer by him which the wife, as i see the evidence, imprudently refused to accept. the husband made an offer to the wife, which she simply rejected, and, for that reason alone, there being no misconduct by the husband, as such, prolonging the litigation, rather, if i could use this word, a slackness by him in getting his finances in order, i see the wife was imprudent to reject that offer. [45] further, i am not entirely certain that had i had all these facts now known to me and presented to me on 20 july 2017, i would have made the orders sought by the wife. however, that may be otiose reasoning. however, the father failed to comply with two sets of consent orders. his offer to settle was very late in the proceedings, some 15 months almost after the original orders were made.  ] further, i am not entirely certain that had i had all these facts now known to me and presented to me on 20 july 2017, i would have made the orders sought by the wife. however, that may be otiose reasoning. however, the father failed to comply with two sets of consent orders. his offer to settle was very late in the proceedings, some 15 months almost after the original orders were made.   the husband made a written offer to the wife on 21 march 2019 offering to resolve both the parenting and property matters. from the terms of the letter, resolution of one was contingent on resolution of the other. (b) the wife responded to the offer made by the husband in relation to the parenting matter on 28 march 2021. her response did not address the property issue. this was appropriate in the circumstances. (c) on 22 august 2019, the husband accepted a parenting proposal earlier made by the wife, and otherwise made a further written offer in relation to the section 79a application. (d) on 29 august 2019, the wife’s solicitor wrote to the husband’s solicitor to advise that the wife did not consent to the husband’s request for an extension of time to file his affidavit. (e) by letter of 3 september 2019, the wife rejected the husband’s offer and made a counter proposal. after the husband’s former lawyer ceased to act for him, that letter was sent directly to the husband on 20 september 2019. (f) on 27 september 2019 the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor taking issue with the way in which the wife had estimated the capital gains tax liability and seeking particulars so as to be in a position to consider the wife’s counter proposal. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter. (g) on 4 october 2019, the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor seeking a reply to the correspondence sent 27 september 2017. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter.   the wife responded to the offer made by the husband in relation to the parenting matter on 28 march 2021. her response did not address the property issue. this was appropriate in the circumstances. (c) on 22 august 2019, the husband accepted a parenting proposal earlier made by the wife, and otherwise made a further written offer in relation to the section 79a application. (d) on 29 august 2019, the wife’s solicitor wrote to the husband’s solicitor to advise that the wife did not consent to the husband’s request for an extension of time to file his affidavit. (e) by letter of 3 september 2019, the wife rejected the husband’s offer and made a counter proposal. after the husband’s former lawyer ceased to act for him, that letter was sent directly to the husband on 20 september 2019. (f) on 27 september 2019 the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor taking issue with the way in which the wife had estimated the capital gains tax liability and seeking particulars so as to be in a position to consider the wife’s counter proposal. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter. (g) on 4 october 2019, the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor seeking a reply to the correspondence sent 27 september 2017. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter.   on 22 august 2019, the husband accepted a parenting proposal earlier made by the wife, and otherwise made a further written offer in relation to the section 79a application. (d) on 29 august 2019, the wife’s solicitor wrote to the husband’s solicitor to advise that the wife did not consent to the husband’s request for an extension of time to file his affidavit. (e) by letter of 3 september 2019, the wife rejected the husband’s offer and made a counter proposal. after the husband’s former lawyer ceased to act for him, that letter was sent directly to the husband on 20 september 2019. (f) on 27 september 2019 the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor taking issue with the way in which the wife had estimated the capital gains tax liability and seeking particulars so as to be in a position to consider the wife’s counter proposal. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter. (g) on 4 october 2019, the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor seeking a reply to the correspondence sent 27 september 2017. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter.   on 29 august 2019, the wife’s solicitor wrote to the husband’s solicitor to advise that the wife did not consent to the husband’s request for an extension of time to file his affidavit. (e) by letter of 3 september 2019, the wife rejected the husband’s offer and made a counter proposal. after the husband’s former lawyer ceased to act for him, that letter was sent directly to the husband on 20 september 2019. (f) on 27 september 2019 the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor taking issue with the way in which the wife had estimated the capital gains tax liability and seeking particulars so as to be in a position to consider the wife’s counter proposal. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter. (g) on 4 october 2019, the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor seeking a reply to the correspondence sent 27 september 2017. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter.   by letter of 3 september 2019, the wife rejected the husband’s offer and made a counter proposal. after the husband’s former lawyer ceased to act for him, that letter was sent directly to the husband on 20 september 2019. (f) on 27 september 2019 the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor taking issue with the way in which the wife had estimated the capital gains tax liability and seeking particulars so as to be in a position to consider the wife’s counter proposal. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter. (g) on 4 october 2019, the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor seeking a reply to the correspondence sent 27 september 2017. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter.   on 27 september 2019 the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor taking issue with the way in which the wife had estimated the capital gains tax liability and seeking particulars so as to be in a position to consider the wife’s counter proposal. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter. (g) on 4 october 2019, the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor seeking a reply to the correspondence sent 27 september 2017. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter.   on 4 october 2019, the husband wrote to the wife’s former solicitor seeking a reply to the correspondence sent 27 september 2017. there is no evidence of a reply to this letter.
whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to comply with previous orders of the court
alleged breaches of the june 2016 and february 2017 orders
alleged breaches of the september 2017 orders
the amount of any tax liability attaching to the applicant wife, arising from her interest in [property a] including but not limited to tax on the capital gain on [property a] with such capital gain to be determined by [mr g] (sic), accountant acting on the wife’s instructions provided that the husband is provided with full access to the communications regarding the determination by [mr g] (sic) and in the event the husband has a concern about the capital gain determination he has liberty to re-list on 28 days' notice.   she delayed in initiating contact with the accountant and failed to provide sufficient or accurate information. (b) from march 2018, the wife made no attempt to identify an alternative accountant (where mr g retired in january 2018). (c) two years following settlement, the wife obtained a capital gains tax estimate from her accountant without consulting the husband.   from march 2018, the wife made no attempt to identify an alternative accountant (where mr g retired in january 2018). (c) two years following settlement, the wife obtained a capital gains tax estimate from her accountant without consulting the husband.   two years following settlement, the wife obtained a capital gains tax estimate from her accountant without consulting the husband.
delay in contacting the accountant and difficulties with the information provided  the wife had already commenced to seek a capital gains tax determination prior to the consent orders of 4 september 2017, although not, apparently, from mr g. for the reasons given in the summary dismissal judgment, i am satisfied that she had done so and had informed the husband of this, by reference to her affidavit, filed 1 september 2017. (b) as set out in the summary dismissal judgment: (i) the wife provided a copy of her application to the ato for a private ruling to the husband through their respective lawyers on 13 september 2017, (ii) mr g sent the husband an e-mail with an estimate of the capital gains tax liability on 13 september 2017, less than two weeks after the date on which the consent orders had been entered into by the parties, (iii) on 18 september 2017, the wife received the ato’s private ruling, informing her that she would not be exempt from capital gains tax. a copy of the private ruling was sent to the husband on 20 september 2017, again through the parties’ respective lawyers, (iv) on 30 october 2017, mr g e-mailed the husband with an estimate that capital gains tax of $34,271 would be payable. he sent that e-mail inviting the husband’s comment before forwarding it to the wife’s solicitor.   as set out in the summary dismissal judgment: (i) the wife provided a copy of her application to the ato for a private ruling to the husband through their respective lawyers on 13 september 2017, (ii) mr g sent the husband an e-mail with an estimate of the capital gains tax liability on 13 september 2017, less than two weeks after the date on which the consent orders had been entered into by the parties, (iii) on 18 september 2017, the wife received the ato’s private ruling, informing her that she would not be exempt from capital gains tax. a copy of the private ruling was sent to the husband on 20 september 2017, again through the parties’ respective lawyers, (iv) on 30 october 2017, mr g e-mailed the husband with an estimate that capital gains tax of $34,271 would be payable. he sent that e-mail inviting the husband’s comment before forwarding it to the wife’s solicitor.   the wife provided a copy of her application to the ato for a private ruling to the husband through their respective lawyers on 13 september 2017, (ii) mr g sent the husband an e-mail with an estimate of the capital gains tax liability on 13 september 2017, less than two weeks after the date on which the consent orders had been entered into by the parties, (iii) on 18 september 2017, the wife received the ato’s private ruling, informing her that she would not be exempt from capital gains tax. a copy of the private ruling was sent to the husband on 20 september 2017, again through the parties’ respective lawyers, (iv) on 30 october 2017, mr g e-mailed the husband with an estimate that capital gains tax of $34,271 would be payable. he sent that e-mail inviting the husband’s comment before forwarding it to the wife’s solicitor.  ) mr g sent the husband an e-mail with an estimate of the capital gains tax liability on 13 september 2017, less than two weeks after the date on which the consent orders had been entered into by the parties, (iii) on 18 september 2017, the wife received the ato’s private ruling, informing her that she would not be exempt from capital gains tax. a copy of the private ruling was sent to the husband on 20 september 2017, again through the parties’ respective lawyers, (iv) on 30 october 2017, mr g e-mailed the husband with an estimate that capital gains tax of $34,271 would be payable. he sent that e-mail inviting the husband’s comment before forwarding it to the wife’s solicitor.  i) on 18 september 2017, the wife received the ato’s private ruling, informing her that she would not be exempt from capital gains tax. a copy of the private ruling was sent to the husband on 20 september 2017, again through the parties’ respective lawyers, (iv) on 30 october 2017, mr g e-mailed the husband with an estimate that capital gains tax of $34,271 would be payable. he sent that e-mail inviting the husband’s comment before forwarding it to the wife’s solicitor.  ) on 30 october 2017, mr g e-mailed the husband with an estimate that capital gains tax of $34,271 would be payable. he sent that e-mail inviting the husband’s comment before forwarding it to the wife’s solicitor.   the capital gains tax estimate provided by mr g to the husband on 13 september 2017 was clearly based on information provided to mr g by the husband.[3] it cannot, in the circumstances, have been considered to have been an accurate assessment. (b) the wife deposed that she instructed her solicitor to write to mr g seeking a capital gains tax calculation on 18 september 2017. the letter sent included a copy of the ato’s private ruling, received by the wife on 13 september 2017. the husband’s solicitor was provided with a copy of that letter.   the wife deposed that she instructed her solicitor to write to mr g seeking a capital gains tax calculation on 18 september 2017. the letter sent included a copy of the ato’s private ruling, received by the wife on 13 september 2017. the husband’s solicitor was provided with a copy of that letter.
... ...to complete the calculation of capital gains...would you kindly supply: invoice from mills oakley for $4,026.98 on settlement date of 18/09/2017. [the wife’s] invoice/s totalling $43,500 for legal services. the relevant invoice/s required are those pertaining to the capital costs of preserving or defending the title of [the property]. example of relevant costs would be stamp duty/title transfer costs, etc. costs relating to divorce/family law proceedings aren’t relevant.   he had sent a draft on the capital gain issue to the husband on 13 september 2017, (b) he had not had contact from the husband after that date. (c) he is retiring and will not act for either the husband or the wife from the date of the email.   he had not had contact from the husband after that date. (c) he is retiring and will not act for either the husband or the wife from the date of the email.   he is retiring and will not act for either the husband or the wife from the date of the email.
failure to consult the husband prior to obtaining a capital gains tax estimate from the wife’s accountant and failure to attempt to agree an alternate accountant
conclusion
whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful
whether a party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing  that of the funds held on trust for the parties, a sum of $17,135.50 be released immediately to the wife, being 50 per cent of the capital gains tax calculated by mr g, (b) the balance of the funds (inferentially the sum of or around $48,000) be immediately released to the husband, and (c) the husband’s section 79a application be withdrawn and dismissed with each party to pay their own costs of and incidental to the proceedings.   the balance of the funds (inferentially the sum of or around $48,000) be immediately released to the husband, and (c) the husband’s section 79a application be withdrawn and dismissed with each party to pay their own costs of and incidental to the proceedings.   the husband’s section 79a application be withdrawn and dismissed with each party to pay their own costs of and incidental to the proceedings.   a copy of the wife’s tax return as lodged and the notice of assessment (once received) be provided to the husband as evidence of the actual capital gains tax liability, (b) not later than two business days from the provision of those documents to the husband, each party do all acts and things necessary to cause the payment of the capital gains tax liability from the funds held on trust, (c) the husband retain and the wife have no right, title or interest in the balance of funds in the trust account after payment of the capital gains tax liability, (d) the section 79a application be withdrawn and dismissed, with each party to bear their own costs.   not later than two business days from the provision of those documents to the husband, each party do all acts and things necessary to cause the payment of the capital gains tax liability from the funds held on trust, (c) the husband retain and the wife have no right, title or interest in the balance of funds in the trust account after payment of the capital gains tax liability, (d) the section 79a application be withdrawn and dismissed, with each party to bear their own costs.   the husband retain and the wife have no right, title or interest in the balance of funds in the trust account after payment of the capital gains tax liability, (d) the section 79a application be withdrawn and dismissed, with each party to bear their own costs.   the section 79a application be withdrawn and dismissed, with each party to bear their own costs.
any other matter the court considers relevant  the wife’s legal fees are unreasonable, inflated by her “litigious, unrelenting and uncompromising conduct and approach” and specifically: (i) the wife’s issue of a subpoena for production of the legal file of the husband’s former solicitor was an “opportunistic fishing expedition” designed to cause him confusion, stress, cost and workload and to derail his preparation for hearing. he described the actions of the wife’s former solicitor as “unconscionable”. (ii) the invoices for legal fees issued to the wife show that she engaged counsel on the day she was served with the husband’s initiating application, which is inconsistent with the actions of a person who considers that there is no genuine case to meet, and can only be an attempt to intimidate the husband. (b) counsel for the wife mislead the court by misstating the nature of the case and should, therefore, be referred for disciplinary action, and that i ignored the husband’s submissions as to the nature of the case he was advancing, preferring, instead to adopt the misleading submission of counsel for the wife. (c) judicial bias.   the wife’s issue of a subpoena for production of the legal file of the husband’s former solicitor was an “opportunistic fishing expedition” designed to cause him confusion, stress, cost and workload and to derail his preparation for hearing. he described the actions of the wife’s former solicitor as “unconscionable”. (ii) the invoices for legal fees issued to the wife show that she engaged counsel on the day she was served with the husband’s initiating application, which is inconsistent with the actions of a person who considers that there is no genuine case to meet, and can only be an attempt to intimidate the husband.  ) the invoices for legal fees issued to the wife show that she engaged counsel on the day she was served with the husband’s initiating application, which is inconsistent with the actions of a person who considers that there is no genuine case to meet, and can only be an attempt to intimidate the husband.   counsel for the wife mislead the court by misstating the nature of the case and should, therefore, be referred for disciplinary action, and that i ignored the husband’s submissions as to the nature of the case he was advancing, preferring, instead to adopt the misleading submission of counsel for the wife. (c) judicial bias.   judicial bias.
the subpoena issued for the husband’s legal file
as foreshadowed during the mention this morning, having carefully considered the evidence that will be required to be presented to the court to support each of our client’s cases, the negotiations leading up to the entering into of the orders being sought to be set aside by my client are critical. in that regard, it is my strong view that your client’s counsel...as well as my client’s counsel...and i will be required to give evidence. likewise, [the wife’s solicitor] and her former colleague from [the law firm previously representing the wife] who provided the taxation advise to your client in relation to the cgt liability are also critical witnesses.
the wife’s actions in engaging counsel immediately on service of the application
counsel’s comments about the nature of the case  if counsel’s submission was genuine, then the court must have regard to the proportionality of costs, and (b) if it was not genuine, counsel should be disciplined for misleading the court.   if it was not genuine, counsel should be disciplined for misleading the court.   there had been a miscarriage of justice on the basis of fraud, duress, suppression of evidence or the giving of false evidence or any other circumstance giving rise to a miscarriage of justice, and, or (b) a party had defaulted in carrying out an obligation imposed on them from the orders and, in the circumstances arising as a result of that default, it is just and equitable to vary or set aside the order and make another in substitution, and (c) if the answer to either of the above inquiries was yes, whether the court should exercise its discretion to set aside and, or vary the orders, and (d) if the answer to each of those inquiries was no, whether orders should be made for the payment of capital gains tax liability from the funds held in the trust account of c lawyers.   a party had defaulted in carrying out an obligation imposed on them from the orders and, in the circumstances arising as a result of that default, it is just and equitable to vary or set aside the order and make another in substitution, and (c) if the answer to either of the above inquiries was yes, whether the court should exercise its discretion to set aside and, or vary the orders, and (d) if the answer to each of those inquiries was no, whether orders should be made for the payment of capital gains tax liability from the funds held in the trust account of c lawyers.   if the answer to either of the above inquiries was yes, whether the court should exercise its discretion to set aside and, or vary the orders, and (d) if the answer to each of those inquiries was no, whether orders should be made for the payment of capital gains tax liability from the funds held in the trust account of c lawyers.   if the answer to each of those inquiries was no, whether orders should be made for the payment of capital gains tax liability from the funds held in the trust account of c lawyers.
judicial bias
discussion
are there circumstances that justify the making of a costs order?  the outcome of the proceedings was – in effect – on the same terms as the wife’s settlement proposal made on 3 september 2019. (b) the wife had put the husband on notice of her intention to pursue costs in the event he pursued the application unsuccessfully. the history of the litigation between the parties has been extensive and costs orders have previously been made in favour of the wife. the husband must have been alive to the possibility that a costs order may be made against him. (c) the husband made and pursued allegations that the wife engaged in fraud, suppression of evidence, the giving of false evidence and breaches of court orders. those serious allegations were not made out at hearing, nor in the appeal proceedings. (d) although the husband contended that the proceedings were necessitated by the wife’s breach of court orders, there were a number of opportunities he could have, but did not, take to ventilate those concerns well in advance of commencing the section 79a application. (e) the wife’s financial circumstances are such that whilst she is in a stronger financial position than the husband, her income has had to extend to meet the costs of the children with little financial support from the husband.   the wife had put the husband on notice of her intention to pursue costs in the event he pursued the application unsuccessfully. the history of the litigation between the parties has been extensive and costs orders have previously been made in favour of the wife. the husband must have been alive to the possibility that a costs order may be made against him. (c) the husband made and pursued allegations that the wife engaged in fraud, suppression of evidence, the giving of false evidence and breaches of court orders. those serious allegations were not made out at hearing, nor in the appeal proceedings. (d) although the husband contended that the proceedings were necessitated by the wife’s breach of court orders, there were a number of opportunities he could have, but did not, take to ventilate those concerns well in advance of commencing the section 79a application. (e) the wife’s financial circumstances are such that whilst she is in a stronger financial position than the husband, her income has had to extend to meet the costs of the children with little financial support from the husband.   the husband made and pursued allegations that the wife engaged in fraud, suppression of evidence, the giving of false evidence and breaches of court orders. those serious allegations were not made out at hearing, nor in the appeal proceedings. (d) although the husband contended that the proceedings were necessitated by the wife’s breach of court orders, there were a number of opportunities he could have, but did not, take to ventilate those concerns well in advance of commencing the section 79a application. (e) the wife’s financial circumstances are such that whilst she is in a stronger financial position than the husband, her income has had to extend to meet the costs of the children with little financial support from the husband.   although the husband contended that the proceedings were necessitated by the wife’s breach of court orders, there were a number of opportunities he could have, but did not, take to ventilate those concerns well in advance of commencing the section 79a application. (e) the wife’s financial circumstances are such that whilst she is in a stronger financial position than the husband, her income has had to extend to meet the costs of the children with little financial support from the husband.   the wife’s financial circumstances are such that whilst she is in a stronger financial position than the husband, her income has had to extend to meet the costs of the children with little financial support from the husband.
what order, then, should be made as to costs?  item one: initiating or opposing an application up to the completion of the first court date, $2,241, plus the daily hearing fee at item 13 applicable to that hearing being, here $305 (for a short mention). (b) item six: preparation for final hearing – two day matter: $5,921. (c) item 13: daily hearing fee for one full day hearing: $2,241. (d) item eight: final hearing costs for attendance of solicitor to take judgment and explain orders: $305, plus the daily hearing fee at item 13 applicable to that attendance, being, here, $305 (for a short mention). (e) item 14: disbursements for counsel’s fees, reasonably incurred, of $14,960. (f) item 14: disbursement for filing fees of $345.   item six: preparation for final hearing – two day matter: $5,921. (c) item 13: daily hearing fee for one full day hearing: $2,241. (d) item eight: final hearing costs for attendance of solicitor to take judgment and explain orders: $305, plus the daily hearing fee at item 13 applicable to that attendance, being, here, $305 (for a short mention). (e) item 14: disbursements for counsel’s fees, reasonably incurred, of $14,960. (f) item 14: disbursement for filing fees of $345.   item 13: daily hearing fee for one full day hearing: $2,241. (d) item eight: final hearing costs for attendance of solicitor to take judgment and explain orders: $305, plus the daily hearing fee at item 13 applicable to that attendance, being, here, $305 (for a short mention). (e) item 14: disbursements for counsel’s fees, reasonably incurred, of $14,960. (f) item 14: disbursement for filing fees of $345.   item eight: final hearing costs for attendance of solicitor to take judgment and explain orders: $305, plus the daily hearing fee at item 13 applicable to that attendance, being, here, $305 (for a short mention). (e) item 14: disbursements for counsel’s fees, reasonably incurred, of $14,960. (f) item 14: disbursement for filing fees of $345.   item 14: disbursements for counsel’s fees, reasonably incurred, of $14,960. (f) item 14: disbursement for filing fees of $345.   item 14: disbursement for filing fees of $345.
the husband’s applications for costs  the wife’s initiating application filed 23 september 2016 seeking to set aside or vary consent property orders (file number ncc2588/2016), and (b) his application in a case filed 22 august 2017 in those proceedings seeking urgent determination of his application for access to the parties’ investment property at property a.   his application in a case filed 22 august 2017 in those proceedings seeking urgent determination of his application for access to the parties’ investment property at property a.   at any stage in a proceeding, or (b) within 28 days after a final decree or order is made, or (c) within any further time allowed by the court.[8]   within 28 days after a final decree or order is made, or (c) within any further time allowed by the court.[8]   within any further time allowed by the court.[8]
associate: dated: 14 december 2022
dated: 14 december 2022
[1] the court file number allocated to the husband’s s 79a application is ncc2588/2016. the court file number allocated to the parenting proceedings is syc8036/2017.[2] husband’s submissions, 25/06/2021: [16(c)].[3] wife’s affidavit, 18/10/2019: ann w30. [4]5 husband’s affidavit, 25/09/2019: ann -16, pp. 90 – 92. [6] husband’s affidavit, 25/09/2019: [95].[7] transcript, 29/10/2019: p. 40: 38 – 40.[8] rule 21.02, federal circuit court rules 2001