last updated: 28 february 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mackinnon & talbot [2022] fedcfamc2f 1738
orders
the court orders that:  that by 4:00pm on 16 april 2023, the respondent pay to the applicant the sum of $159,742. (b) in the event that the respondent defaults in complying with order 1(a) herein, the respondent shall forthwith sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to list for sale the property at b street, suburb c in the state of new south wales (‘the b street, suburb c property’) at a listing price recommended to her by a real estate agent and shall proceed to a sale of the b street, suburb c property at a sale price recommended to her by a real estate agent and following such sale the proceeds of sale shall be applied as follows: (i) in adjustment of rates on settlement, (ii) in payment of agent’s commission (if any) on sale, (iii) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of sale, (iv) in payment of a sum sufficient to discharge the registered mortgage over the b street, suburb c property, (v) in payment to the applicant of the sum of $159,742 together with any interest thereon under the family law act 1975 (cth), (vi) the balance then remaining to the respondent. (c) that in the event that the b street, suburb c property does not sell by private sale within three months from the date of its initial listing then the respondent shall sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to list the b street, suburb c property for sale by public auction with an auction agent agreed upon between the parties, at a reserve price recommended to her by the auction agent and shall proceed to a sale at a sale price recommended to her by the auction agent and the respondent shall be solely responsible for all costs and expenses of the auction payable prior to the auction sale and following such sale the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided for in order 1(b). (d) that in the event that order 1(c) operates and the b street, suburb c property does not sell by public auction in accordance with order 1(c) then the b street, suburb c property shall be resubmitted for sale by private treaty in accordance with the provisions of order 1(b) hereof and the b street, suburb c property shall be resubmitted for sale by public auction at six (6) monthly intervals from the last public auction and be resubmitted for sale by private treaty between such auctions, until the b street, suburb c property shall be sold and upon such sale either by public auction or private treaty the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in order 1(b) hereof. (e) that the applicant is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the respondent of all real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources currently in his power, possession or control other than as dealt with specifically elsewhere in this order, and including, but not limited to, his westpac bank account ending #...80, his cars and motorcycles, his personal belongings, and his interest in the super fund 1. (f) that the respondent is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the applicant of all real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources currently in her power, possession or control other than as dealt with specifically elsewhere in this order, including but not limited to, the b street, suburb c property, the motor vehicle 1, her commonwealth bank account ending #...61, and her personal belongings, the talbot superannuation plan self-managed superannuation fund, and her interest in the super fund 2.   in the event that the respondent defaults in complying with order 1(a) herein, the respondent shall forthwith sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to list for sale the property at b street, suburb c in the state of new south wales (‘the b street, suburb c property’) at a listing price recommended to her by a real estate agent and shall proceed to a sale of the b street, suburb c property at a sale price recommended to her by a real estate agent and following such sale the proceeds of sale shall be applied as follows: (i) in adjustment of rates on settlement, (ii) in payment of agent’s commission (if any) on sale, (iii) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of sale, (iv) in payment of a sum sufficient to discharge the registered mortgage over the b street, suburb c property, (v) in payment to the applicant of the sum of $159,742 together with any interest thereon under the family law act 1975 (cth), (vi) the balance then remaining to the respondent. (c) that in the event that the b street, suburb c property does not sell by private sale within three months from the date of its initial listing then the respondent shall sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to list the b street, suburb c property for sale by public auction with an auction agent agreed upon between the parties, at a reserve price recommended to her by the auction agent and shall proceed to a sale at a sale price recommended to her by the auction agent and the respondent shall be solely responsible for all costs and expenses of the auction payable prior to the auction sale and following such sale the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided for in order 1(b). (d) that in the event that order 1(c) operates and the b street, suburb c property does not sell by public auction in accordance with order 1(c) then the b street, suburb c property shall be resubmitted for sale by private treaty in accordance with the provisions of order 1(b) hereof and the b street, suburb c property shall be resubmitted for sale by public auction at six (6) monthly intervals from the last public auction and be resubmitted for sale by private treaty between such auctions, until the b street, suburb c property shall be sold and upon such sale either by public auction or private treaty the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in order 1(b) hereof. (e) that the applicant is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the respondent of all real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources currently in his power, possession or control other than as dealt with specifically elsewhere in this order, and including, but not limited to, his westpac bank account ending #...80, his cars and motorcycles, his personal belongings, and his interest in the super fund 1. (f) that the respondent is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the applicant of all real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources currently in her power, possession or control other than as dealt with specifically elsewhere in this order, including but not limited to, the b street, suburb c property, the motor vehicle 1, her commonwealth bank account ending #...61, and her personal belongings, the talbot superannuation plan self-managed superannuation fund, and her interest in the super fund 2.   in adjustment of rates on settlement, (ii) in payment of agent’s commission (if any) on sale, (iii) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of sale, (iv) in payment of a sum sufficient to discharge the registered mortgage over the b street, suburb c property, (v) in payment to the applicant of the sum of $159,742 together with any interest thereon under the family law act 1975 (cth), (vi) the balance then remaining to the respondent.  ) in payment of agent’s commission (if any) on sale, (iii) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of sale, (iv) in payment of a sum sufficient to discharge the registered mortgage over the b street, suburb c property, (v) in payment to the applicant of the sum of $159,742 together with any interest thereon under the family law act 1975 (cth), (vi) the balance then remaining to the respondent.  i) in payment of legal and all other proper costs of sale, (iv) in payment of a sum sufficient to discharge the registered mortgage over the b street, suburb c property, (v) in payment to the applicant of the sum of $159,742 together with any interest thereon under the family law act 1975 (cth), (vi) the balance then remaining to the respondent.  ) in payment of a sum sufficient to discharge the registered mortgage over the b street, suburb c property, (v) in payment to the applicant of the sum of $159,742 together with any interest thereon under the family law act 1975 (cth), (vi) the balance then remaining to the respondent.   in payment to the applicant of the sum of $159,742 together with any interest thereon under the family law act 1975 (cth), (vi) the balance then remaining to the respondent.  ) the balance then remaining to the respondent.   that in the event that the b street, suburb c property does not sell by private sale within three months from the date of its initial listing then the respondent shall sign all documents and instruments and do all things necessary to list the b street, suburb c property for sale by public auction with an auction agent agreed upon between the parties, at a reserve price recommended to her by the auction agent and shall proceed to a sale at a sale price recommended to her by the auction agent and the respondent shall be solely responsible for all costs and expenses of the auction payable prior to the auction sale and following such sale the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided for in order 1(b). (d) that in the event that order 1(c) operates and the b street, suburb c property does not sell by public auction in accordance with order 1(c) then the b street, suburb c property shall be resubmitted for sale by private treaty in accordance with the provisions of order 1(b) hereof and the b street, suburb c property shall be resubmitted for sale by public auction at six (6) monthly intervals from the last public auction and be resubmitted for sale by private treaty between such auctions, until the b street, suburb c property shall be sold and upon such sale either by public auction or private treaty the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in order 1(b) hereof. (e) that the applicant is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the respondent of all real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources currently in his power, possession or control other than as dealt with specifically elsewhere in this order, and including, but not limited to, his westpac bank account ending #...80, his cars and motorcycles, his personal belongings, and his interest in the super fund 1. (f) that the respondent is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the applicant of all real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources currently in her power, possession or control other than as dealt with specifically elsewhere in this order, including but not limited to, the b street, suburb c property, the motor vehicle 1, her commonwealth bank account ending #...61, and her personal belongings, the talbot superannuation plan self-managed superannuation fund, and her interest in the super fund 2.   that in the event that order 1(c) operates and the b street, suburb c property does not sell by public auction in accordance with order 1(c) then the b street, suburb c property shall be resubmitted for sale by private treaty in accordance with the provisions of order 1(b) hereof and the b street, suburb c property shall be resubmitted for sale by public auction at six (6) monthly intervals from the last public auction and be resubmitted for sale by private treaty between such auctions, until the b street, suburb c property shall be sold and upon such sale either by public auction or private treaty the proceeds of sale shall be applied as provided in order 1(b) hereof. (e) that the applicant is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the respondent of all real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources currently in his power, possession or control other than as dealt with specifically elsewhere in this order, and including, but not limited to, his westpac bank account ending #...80, his cars and motorcycles, his personal belongings, and his interest in the super fund 1. (f) that the respondent is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the applicant of all real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources currently in her power, possession or control other than as dealt with specifically elsewhere in this order, including but not limited to, the b street, suburb c property, the motor vehicle 1, her commonwealth bank account ending #...61, and her personal belongings, the talbot superannuation plan self-managed superannuation fund, and her interest in the super fund 2.   that the applicant is the sole owner in law and in equity as between himself and the respondent of all real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources currently in his power, possession or control other than as dealt with specifically elsewhere in this order, and including, but not limited to, his westpac bank account ending #...80, his cars and motorcycles, his personal belongings, and his interest in the super fund 1. (f) that the respondent is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the applicant of all real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources currently in her power, possession or control other than as dealt with specifically elsewhere in this order, including but not limited to, the b street, suburb c property, the motor vehicle 1, her commonwealth bank account ending #...61, and her personal belongings, the talbot superannuation plan self-managed superannuation fund, and her interest in the super fund 2.   that the respondent is the sole owner in law and in equity as between herself and the applicant of all real property, personal property, financial assets and financial resources currently in her power, possession or control other than as dealt with specifically elsewhere in this order, including but not limited to, the b street, suburb c property, the motor vehicle 1, her commonwealth bank account ending #...61, and her personal belongings, the talbot superannuation plan self-managed superannuation fund, and her interest in the super fund 2.
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
introduction
the proceedings
the parties were in a de facto relationship for more than two years
and the matter was listed for final hearing on 29 and 30 november 2018.
the material relied upon by the parties
the competing proposals of the parties
credit 9] the court is reluctant to make adverse findings in respect to a party’s credit in parenting proceedings unless it is necessary “to determine the real issues joined between the parties”: adamson & adamson (2014) flc 93–622 (adamson) at [90]. [130] the parties’ written and oral evidence were at odds in a number of significant respects. this was most significantly the case in respect to the parties’ respective contentions regarding the conduct of the father constituting acts of family violence and the possible cause of y’s severe injuries during infancy. in those circumstances it is necessary to make findings in respect to the parties’ credit, in particular in respect to the differing accounts they give in respect to allegations of family violence between them. [131] in mcglen — mcleod v galloway [2012] nswca 368 at [87], tobias aja, with whom allsop p and campbell ja agreed, referred with approval to the test for assessing the truth of a witness’s evidence as being stated by tugendhat j in thornton v telegraph media group ltd [2011] ewhc 1884 (qb) at 73 , where it was said:
there is great assistance to be obtained from extra-judicial writing of lord bingham in a chapter headed “the judge as juror: the judicial determination of factual issues” ... lord bingham cited sir richard eggleston qc evidence, proof and probability (1978), 155 who set out the main tests to be used by a judge to determine whether a witness is lying or not.  the consistency of the witness’s evidence with what is agreed, or clearly shown by other evidence, to have occurred, (2) the internal consistency of the witness’s evidence, (3) consistency with what the witness has said or deposed on other occasions, (4) the credit of the witness in relation to matters not germane to the litigation, (5) the demeanour of the witness.
... been homeless for most of that period. i have been living in my motorhome
was also incorrect as he admitted that following separation he leased the property at b street, suburb c, and paid rent.
mr brown: you tell the court now that in relation to the threshold issue you lied to the court? respondent: yes.
i do not buy food at mcdonald’s and have not ever personally made a purchase at domino’s pizza
was incorrect in relation to both outlets.
the evidence
... stay overnight before a school day or when i was working the next day
but does not exclude nights when she was not working the next day and it was not a school day.
... serviced the [p street, suburb q] flat on a weekly basis for a significant part of the 15 months that the respondent was residing in [country h].
...called upon three times in the 15 months to attend to this – i recall that i had to repair a rear door, a leaking roof and a side gate at the property.
... did work in relation to maintenance and refurbishment of [p street, suburb q]
... at various times, for various periods, the flat was also cleaned by contract cleaners.
... before 2008 the [p street, suburb q] unit was serviced and cleaned by me or cleaners arranged by [company r] (‘the managing agent’).
... between 2005 and 2007 the applicant did some handyman jobs and made some small improvements at the [p street, suburb q] property.
... while i would not describe the work as renovations the applicant carried out some work to the property prior to the sale.
... replaced half of the fence along the eastern side with horizontal corrugated iron attached to existing metal reinforcing posts, painted the decking and erected some temporary screens to block view of neighbouring yard from my deck and put a bracket under the kitchen bench top
and that he painted the front face of the house and, together with others including mr d, and that he:
... painted the wrought iron fence at the front of the property.
... finishing fireproofing of the attic after a contractor that had failed to complete the work
the respondent says that she paid a total of $5720 to rectify the fire rating to a party wall (the m street, suburb e property was a semi-detached property) and for inspection and certification, and that the applicant’s contribution was to:  nish] what was necessary for a certificate which included filling a gap left by the builder.
... tools and materials for the renovation of the [b street, suburb c] property.
... by drawing down around $20,000 on my [b street, suburb c] mortgage and using a tax credit of around $11,000.
... the savings of the respondent and myself were used to pay for necessary materials, although i acknowledge that the respondent paid more for the purchase of materials than i did.
... contributed a substantial amount of money to this remedial work and paid for the invoices some of the trades persons or gave cash to the respondent to pay them.
... assisted the trades persons conducting the remedial work with my labour.
adjustment for around $2000 for a [finance] course on behalf of the applicant in or around february 2014, payment by bank transfer into the applicant’s account of $10,000 on 15 may 2014 ... and $2500 in cash in may 2014.
i built a shed from various materials that i had sourced or had been left on the property by the previous builder.
... in 2013 the applicant had partially built a shed
and provides at page 283 of the respondent’s tender bundle a photo of a rather ramshackle and incomplete shed-type structure that she asserts is the shed in question.
... a builder recommended by an architect friend.
... managed the building trades to complete some urgently required remedial work and thereafter to continue the renovation ...
and organised trade quotes. from august 2014 until april 2015, he was engaged full-time in the renovations working on the second b street, suburb c renovation and did not engage in paid employment, and that he returned to paid employment the following april 2015 but still continued to work on the second b street, suburb c renovations outside his working hours, being after hours and on weekends.
... carried out some of the work described in his affidavit under second renovation attempt
... towards joint living expenses for [ms talbot], [mr d] and i, including household bills, groceries, and day-to-day living expenses, plus giving the respondent amounts of cash as requested by her, which could vary from some hundreds of dollars to some thousands of dollars in any given week when i was working.
... one or 2 of the respondent’s credit card bills which amounted to thousands of dollars although i cannot recall the exact amount ...
and
... rates, amounting to the sum of approximately $450 per quarter utilities, amounting to the sum of approximately $600-$700 per quarter, and other day-to-day expenses.
i paid all rates and utilities bill although the applicant may have paid one of rates bills in the second half of 2012 which i cannot account for. ...
i paid practically all household expenses for [mr d] and myself from 2005 to 2015.
... i do not take issue with the use of the debit card for meals given the applicant was attempting building work ...
... has never paid any child support to my knowledge – the respondent told me this.
... has had the use and occupation of [b street, suburb c] since we finally separated in ... 2015. so far as i am aware the respondent has paid the mortgage.
submissions
... bearing in mind the windfall element, given the substantial value increase of [b street, suburb c], the overall contribution of the applicant ought to be assessed at 40%.
the law ] in many cases where an application is made for a property settlement order, the just and equitable requirement is readily satisfied by observing that, as the result of a choice made by one or both of the parties, the husband and wife are no longer living in a marital relationship. it will be just and equitable to make a property settlement order in such a case because there is not and will not thereafter be the common use of property by the husband and wife. no less importantly, the express and implicit assumptions that underpinned the existing property arrangements have been brought to an end by the voluntary severance of the mutuality of the marital relationship. that is, any express or implicit assumption that the parties may have made to the effect that existing arrangements of marital property interests were sufficient or appropriate during the continuance of their marital relationship is brought to an end with the ending of the marital relationship. and the assumption that any adjustment to those interests could be effected consensually as needed or desired is also brought to an end. hence it will be just and equitable that the court make a property settlement order. what order, if any, should then be made is determined by applying s 79(4).  ] ... indeed, the authorities are consistent in finding that assessing contributions is not an accounting exercise but a holistic one (brandt & brandt [1997] famca 21, (1997) flc 92-758, norbis & norbis [1986] hca 17, (1986) 161 clr 513).  ] as is plain from earlier decisions of this court, regard must be had to the use made of contributions of various types so as to compare the contributions made by each of the parties during the course of, and over the length of, their relationship (see, for example, in the marriage of pierce (1998) flc 92-844) but that is an entirely different proposition to, as it were, causally linking contributions with their asserted financial “product” or “value”. the former recognises that the nature, form and extent of contributions made by each of the parties might differ, the latter suggests that the absence of a causal link counts as no contribution at all. [15] the search for a causal link might be seen to come instinctively to the necessary inquiry and all the more so when regard is had to s 79(4)(a) which refers to financial contributions made “...directly or indirectly...” “...to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property ...” and goes on to also refer to the financial contribution made “...otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property...” the terms of that sub-paragraph might, naturally enough, be seen to suggest a causal link between those contributions and the “financial product” which those contributions of that type are said to have produced. that same requirement might also be seen to suggest that relevant contributions of that type can be seen to be quantifiable – or, at least, conceptualised – in monetary terms, in contradistinction to contributions made pursuant to s 79(4)(c). [16] while that apparent “causal connection” might be seen in s 79(4)(a) (and (b)), no such connection is apparent from the terms of s 79(4)(c), contributions of that latter type are not linked by the words of the sub-paragraph to the “...acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property...” or, indeed, to “property” at all. this is not a legislative oversight, the 1983 amendments to the act which inserted the current s 79(4)(c) were specifically intended, relevantly, to remove any suggestion that there needed to be a causal link between contributions of that type and any particular asset or property. the explanatory memorandum to the family law act amendment bill 1983 provides, at clause 36, that a specific purpose of the re-casting of s 79(4) was, relevantly, to:
... revise sub-section 79(4) to remove the possibility of an interpretation of the sub-section requiring that there be a nexus between a spouse’s contribution and a specific item of property in section 79 proceedings ...  8] ... the task is to consider the contributions holistically over the whole period from the commencement of cohabitation to trial, and the analysis requires the court to weight all of the contributions of all types prescribed by section 79(4) made by both parties across the entirety of the relationship until the time of hearing, including the post-separation period.  9] as the chief justice points out, with those principles in mind, the trial judge adopted a broad-brush approach to the parties’ respective expenditure. nowhere error is established by reason alone of that approach, authority eschews “overly pernickety analysis” and section 79 demands neither an audit nor an exercise in accounting. however, when significant sums of money are said by one party or the other to have been “wasted” or to amount to a unilateral “premature distribution of property” and the evidence is suggestive of either or both, an analysis of the relevant sums and their use is needed.
consideration
... the unusual circumstances of the long cohabitation of the parties before the marriage
and held that:
section 79(4)(b) refers to “any contribution made as a homemaker or parent”. such a contribution becomes relevant when the court considers an application for an alteration of property interests. there is nothing in sec. 79(4)(a) or (b) which requires the court to disregard financial or other material contributions made before the marriage. to disregard such contributions would clearly cause injustice in many cases. ... there is nothing in sec. 79 which expressly requires the court to disregard contributions as a homemaker or parent because they were made before the marriage. however, the fact that the parties were not married for a substantial portion of the time during which such contributions were made may have some weight when the court comes to consider the justice and equity of the particular order which it contemplates. what such weight should be will depend on all the relevant circumstances of the particular case. ... by virtue of sec. 79(4)(d) the matters referred to in sec. 75(2)(k), namely the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party seeking provision are matters to be taken into account. there is, therefore, no reason for reading into sec. 79(4)(b) and implied qualification that a contribution as a homemaker and parent must be disregarded if it has been made before the marriage. furthermore, under sec. 75(2)o) the court may take into account “any fact or circumstance which in the opinion of the court, the justice of the matter requires to be taken into account”. lengthy cohabitation before the marriage may be such a fact or circumstance which injustice should be taken into account ... in our view the court is entitled to look at the whole of the history of the cohabitation of the applicant and respondent for the purposes of determining what alteration of property interests (if any) should be made, or what maintenance should be paid for the respondent. in our view the evaluation of the respondent’s contributions as a homemaker and parent should have taken into account her contribution both before and since the marriage.
... nothing in [section 79(4)(c)] prevents me from taking into account a contribution made by a person who subsequently becomes a party to a marriage to the welfare of a cohabitation unit composed of the persons who are now known to me as the parties to the marriage in question. ... i would be surprised if this court, which admittedly can only enforce rights arising out of a marriage, could not in determining what is just and equitable as between the parties take into account facts and circumstances outside the marital relationship. again a ruling to the contrary would have wide and possibly devastating consequences for the jurisdiction of this court.
the essential question is, however, whether sec. 79(4)(c) enables the court to take into consideration contributions which occurred before the marriage. ... it can be noted that a “party to a marriage includes a reference to a person who was a party to a marriage that has been dissolved or annulled”. this could imply that the terms “party to the marriage” or “parties to the marriage” serves to identify the parties rather than to fix the period of the marriage is the only period during which a relevant contribution might be made. this view is reinforced by a consideration of the other paragraphs of sec. 79(4). for example, one party may in fact make a direct financial contribution to the acquisition of property of one or both parties before marriage. this is a common enough occurrence. ... the decisions of the court have not made a distinction between pre-and post-marriage contributions for the purpose para of (a) and (b) of sec. 79(4). ... in williams v williams [1985] hca 52, (1985) flc 91-628 the high court held that a contribution made to the welfare of the family after cohabitation ceased could be taken into account under para. (c). the issues canvassed before us were dealt with extensively in g and g, the reasoning of which we adopt. ... in principle there is nothing to require the exclusion of pre-marriage contributions.
... contributions made by parties prior to their marriage, whether or not they are cohabiting, can be treated as coming within s. 79 provided that the parties subsequently marry and provided that the matters in question have a sufficiently relevant connection with the marriage to be treated in that way.  ] an essential component of mr broun’s submission was that it is legitimate for the court to take into account under s 79 contributions which have occurred pre-marriage. in that context, mr broun referred us to cases such as olliver and olliver, g and g, nemeth and nemeth and kowalski and kowalski [1992] famca 54, (1993) flc 92-342. it seems to us that those cases support that proposition which is now well-established in this court. to the extent that kowalski’s case may suggest that, once the parties have or had been married, any financial dealings, no matter how far they pre-date or post-date the marriage, are encompassed by s 79, we have reservations about that as we feel that there must be some causal or at least temporal connection, but this is of no significance in this case. [38] mr mater, for the respondent, submitted that pre-marriage contributions may only be taken into account if they occurred during the cohabitation of the parties and that there is no basis for the view that s 79 can apply to an unconditional gift made prior to marriage and cohabitation. [39] whilst pre-marriage cohabitation is the most common circumstances in the reported cases, there is no basis in s 79 or any valid social justification for that view. in the unreported decision of the full court in lozanov (8 june, 1994, fogarty, baker and mccall jj) the court specifically rejected that argument, concluding that contributions made by parties prior to the marriage, whether they work cohabiting or not, can be treated as contributions under s 79 provided the parties subsequently marry and the matters have a sufficiently relevant connection with the marriage.
the clear conclusion arising from the above referred to cases is that cohabitation is not a necessary ingredient in order to consider pre-marriage contributions.
the property
assets
1.
respondent
b street, suburb c, nsw
$1,725,000
2.
motor vehicle 1
$12,000
3.
commonwealth bank account number #...61
$3281
4.
personal belongings
$7000
5.
applicant
westpac account number #...80
$11,213
6.
cars and motorcycles
$34,500
7.
$2000
total assets
$1,794,994.00
liabilities
8.
loan account secured by mortgage on the b street, suburb c property
$686,698
total liabilities
$686,698.00
superannuation
9.
super fund 1 – accumulation fund
$32,724
10.
talbot superannuation plan –smsf
$197,889
11.
super fund 2 – accumulation fund
$33,540
total superannuation
$264,153.00
consideration of the contributions of each of the parties
consideration of any adjustment between the parties for the matters under section 90sm(4)(d) and (e) - section 90sf(3)
... does have a limitation of left elbow function secondary to this injury. he has a restricted range of motion, with an inability to completely straighten his elbow, at approximately 15°. he has moderate weakness and a persistent mild elbow ache.
... for this degree of injury he has actually had a very good outcome and is quite fortunate to have a functional elbow. any deterioration in respect to progressive osteoarthritis i expect to be over many years and also related to the amount of heavy work required from the elbow during that period.  nstruction work] involves climbing which entails climbing and [sic] internal climbing ladder which is often 50-80 m high. this puts considerable strain on my left arm and i am largely reliant strength in my right arm to hoist me up the ladder and get me back down. this procedure can be somewhat precarious-i [sic] am always very careful but i know that it would be easy to fall.
i hope that i can obtain employment with the same company after i recover from my cancer treatment.
conclusion
associate: dated: 16 december 2022
dated: 16 december 2022
[1] a1 to a3 were marked as exhibits in the threshold hearing in 2018.[2] jones & dunkel (1959) 101 clr 298.[3] family law act 1975 (cth) s 90sm.[4] family law act 1975 (cth) s 90sm(1)(a).[5] family law act 1975 (cth) s 90sm(1)(d).[6] family law act 1975 (cth) s 90sm(3).[7] stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108; see, especially, [37].[8] stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108, [37].[9] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[10] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39]. see also family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(4)(a)-(c).[11] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[12] hickey [2003] famca 395, [39].[13] hickey [2003] famca 395, [47].[14] see, eg, jabour & jabour [2019] famcafc 78.[15] in the marriage of harris [1991] famca 124; (1991) 104 flr 458, 464.[16] family law act 1975 (cth) s 90rb.[17] in the marriage of robb [1994] famca 136; (1994) 18 fam lr 489.[18] in the marriage of robb [1994] famca 136; (1994) 18 fam lr 489.