last updated: 6 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
florence & stanbury [2022] fedcfamc2f 1755
orders
the court orders that:
6.1 until the commencement of term 1 in 2024, during the school terms over a fortnightly regime as set out below:   week a – (being in each school term during week numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 if applicable): (i) from 3.00pm thursday at the conclusion of school until the following friday at 3.00pm (or in circumstances as outlined below 3.40pm), and (ii) to facilitate time in order 6.1(a)(i) the father will collect the children from their respective places of education, or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to their respective place of education, at the conclusion of such time. in circumstances where any child/children is not attending school (on the friday) the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at 3.40pm. (b) week b – (being in each school term during week numbers 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10): (i) from 3.00pm thursday at the conclusion of school until 4.00pm on the following sunday, and (ii) to facilitate time in order 6.1(b)(i) the father will collect the child/children from their respective places of education, or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at the conclusion of time,   from 3.00pm thursday at the conclusion of school until the following friday at 3.00pm (or in circumstances as outlined below 3.40pm), and (ii) to facilitate time in order 6.1(a)(i) the father will collect the children from their respective places of education, or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to their respective place of education, at the conclusion of such time. in circumstances where any child/children is not attending school (on the friday) the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at 3.40pm.  ) to facilitate time in order 6.1(a)(i) the father will collect the children from their respective places of education, or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to their respective place of education, at the conclusion of such time. in circumstances where any child/children is not attending school (on the friday) the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at 3.40pm.   week b – (being in each school term during week numbers 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10): (i) from 3.00pm thursday at the conclusion of school until 4.00pm on the following sunday, and (ii) to facilitate time in order 6.1(b)(i) the father will collect the child/children from their respective places of education, or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at the conclusion of time,   from 3.00pm thursday at the conclusion of school until 4.00pm on the following sunday, and (ii) to facilitate time in order 6.1(b)(i) the father will collect the child/children from their respective places of education, or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at the conclusion of time,  ) to facilitate time in order 6.1(b)(i) the father will collect the child/children from their respective places of education, or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at the conclusion of time,
6.2 from the commencement of term 1 in 2024, during the school terms over a fortnightly regime as set out below:   week a – (being in each school term during week numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11 if applicable): (i) from 3.00pm thursday at the conclusion of school until the following friday at 3.00pm (or in circumstances as outlined below 3.40pm), and (ii) to facilitate such time in order 6.2(a)(i) the father will collect the children from their respective places of education, or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to their respective place of education, at the conclusion of such time. in circumstances where any child/children is not attending school (on the friday) the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at 3.40pm. (b) week b – (being in each school term during week numbers 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10): (i) from 3.00pm thursday or the conclusion of school until the following monday at 9.00am or the commencement of school, and (ii) to facilitate such time in order 6.2(b)(i) the father will collect the child/children from their respective places of education or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to their respective place of education at the conclusion of such time. in circumstances where any child/children is not attending school (on the monday) the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at 9.30am.   from 3.00pm thursday at the conclusion of school until the following friday at 3.00pm (or in circumstances as outlined below 3.40pm), and (ii) to facilitate such time in order 6.2(a)(i) the father will collect the children from their respective places of education, or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to their respective place of education, at the conclusion of such time. in circumstances where any child/children is not attending school (on the friday) the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at 3.40pm.  ) to facilitate such time in order 6.2(a)(i) the father will collect the children from their respective places of education, or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to their respective place of education, at the conclusion of such time. in circumstances where any child/children is not attending school (on the friday) the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at 3.40pm.   week b – (being in each school term during week numbers 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10): (i) from 3.00pm thursday or the conclusion of school until the following monday at 9.00am or the commencement of school, and (ii) to facilitate such time in order 6.2(b)(i) the father will collect the child/children from their respective places of education or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to their respective place of education at the conclusion of such time. in circumstances where any child/children is not attending school (on the monday) the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at 9.30am.   from 3.00pm thursday or the conclusion of school until the following monday at 9.00am or the commencement of school, and (ii) to facilitate such time in order 6.2(b)(i) the father will collect the child/children from their respective places of education or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to their respective place of education at the conclusion of such time. in circumstances where any child/children is not attending school (on the monday) the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at 9.30am.  ) to facilitate such time in order 6.2(b)(i) the father will collect the child/children from their respective places of education or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm and the father will return the child/children to their respective place of education at the conclusion of such time. in circumstances where any child/children is not attending school (on the monday) the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at 9.30am.   for the first week of the nsw gazetted school holidays at the conclusion of terms 1, 2 and 3 from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until the mid-point saturday at 4.00pm, (b) to facilitate time in order 6.3(a) the father will collect the child/children from their respective places of education or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm at the commencement of such time and the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at the conclusion of such time at 4.00pm on the mid-point saturday.   to facilitate time in order 6.3(a) the father will collect the child/children from their respective places of education or in circumstances whereby any child/children are not at school the mother will deliver the child/children to the father’s place of residence at 3.40pm at the commencement of such time and the father will return the child/children to the mother’s place of residence at the conclusion of such time at 4.00pm on the mid-point saturday.
7. the children will spend time with each of the parents at the conclusion of term 4, during the christmas/summer school holiday periods as follows:
7.1 in 2022 and each alternate year thereafter the children will spend time with each of the parents as set out below:
7.2 in 2023 and each alternate year after the children will spend time with their mother and father as set out below:
8.2.1 if the children are not living with the mother on mother’s day then the children will return to the mother on that day at 9.00am, 8.2.2 to facilitate time the mother will collect the children from the father’s place of residence.
8.3.1 if the children are not already spending time with the father pursuant to these orders then the children will spend time with the father on father’s day from 9.00am to 4.00pm on that day.
reasons for judgmentamended pursuant to r 10.14(b) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) on 20 december 2022
judge carty
introduction
background
documents relied upon  outline of case (final hearing) filed 3 august 2022, (b) amended initiating application filed 27 october 2021, (c) affidavit of father filed 19 july 2022, and (d) affidavit of father filed 29 july 2022.   amended initiating application filed 27 october 2021, (c) affidavit of father filed 19 july 2022, and (d) affidavit of father filed 29 july 2022.   affidavit of father filed 19 july 2022, and (d) affidavit of father filed 29 july 2022.   affidavit of father filed 29 july 2022.   outline of case filed 2 august 2022, (b) amended response filed 12 july 2022, (c) affidavit of mother filed 25 july 2022, (d) affidavit of ms j filed 22 july 2022, and (e) child inclusive conference memorandum to the court prepared by family consultant mr k on 1 june 2021. [2]   amended response filed 12 july 2022, (c) affidavit of mother filed 25 july 2022, (d) affidavit of ms j filed 22 july 2022, and (e) child inclusive conference memorandum to the court prepared by family consultant mr k on 1 june 2021. [2]   affidavit of mother filed 25 july 2022, (d) affidavit of ms j filed 22 july 2022, and (e) child inclusive conference memorandum to the court prepared by family consultant mr k on 1 june 2021. [2]   affidavit of ms j filed 22 july 2022, and (e) child inclusive conference memorandum to the court prepared by family consultant mr k on 1 june 2021. [2]   child inclusive conference memorandum to the court prepared by family consultant mr k on 1 june 2021. [2]
proposals of the parties
the father’s proposal   that the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children. (b) that the children live with each parent on a week about basis from thursday to thursday. (c) that the parents can each suspend the other parent’s time with the children on one occasion each calendar year for the purpose of spending a two week block period with the children, on conditions including that the block period does not exceed 14 nights and that it occurs during the children’s school holiday periods. (d) spend time with orders for special occasions including mother’s day, father’s day, each parent’s birthday, the children’s birthdays, easter and christmas. (e) changeovers at the children’s school or day care or as otherwise agreed, and the parents be at liberty to send a nominee over the age of 18 years who is known to the children to attend changeover on their behalf. (f) communication with the children, exchange of information between parents, restraints against denigration or showing the children any documents relating to these proceedings, or communicating through the children. (g) parents enrol and keep the children enrolled at city b public school and in due course at l school. (h) passport and international travel orders.   that the children live with each parent on a week about basis from thursday to thursday. (c) that the parents can each suspend the other parent’s time with the children on one occasion each calendar year for the purpose of spending a two week block period with the children, on conditions including that the block period does not exceed 14 nights and that it occurs during the children’s school holiday periods. (d) spend time with orders for special occasions including mother’s day, father’s day, each parent’s birthday, the children’s birthdays, easter and christmas. (e) changeovers at the children’s school or day care or as otherwise agreed, and the parents be at liberty to send a nominee over the age of 18 years who is known to the children to attend changeover on their behalf. (f) communication with the children, exchange of information between parents, restraints against denigration or showing the children any documents relating to these proceedings, or communicating through the children. (g) parents enrol and keep the children enrolled at city b public school and in due course at l school. (h) passport and international travel orders.   that the parents can each suspend the other parent’s time with the children on one occasion each calendar year for the purpose of spending a two week block period with the children, on conditions including that the block period does not exceed 14 nights and that it occurs during the children’s school holiday periods. (d) spend time with orders for special occasions including mother’s day, father’s day, each parent’s birthday, the children’s birthdays, easter and christmas. (e) changeovers at the children’s school or day care or as otherwise agreed, and the parents be at liberty to send a nominee over the age of 18 years who is known to the children to attend changeover on their behalf. (f) communication with the children, exchange of information between parents, restraints against denigration or showing the children any documents relating to these proceedings, or communicating through the children. (g) parents enrol and keep the children enrolled at city b public school and in due course at l school. (h) passport and international travel orders.   spend time with orders for special occasions including mother’s day, father’s day, each parent’s birthday, the children’s birthdays, easter and christmas. (e) changeovers at the children’s school or day care or as otherwise agreed, and the parents be at liberty to send a nominee over the age of 18 years who is known to the children to attend changeover on their behalf. (f) communication with the children, exchange of information between parents, restraints against denigration or showing the children any documents relating to these proceedings, or communicating through the children. (g) parents enrol and keep the children enrolled at city b public school and in due course at l school. (h) passport and international travel orders.   changeovers at the children’s school or day care or as otherwise agreed, and the parents be at liberty to send a nominee over the age of 18 years who is known to the children to attend changeover on their behalf. (f) communication with the children, exchange of information between parents, restraints against denigration or showing the children any documents relating to these proceedings, or communicating through the children. (g) parents enrol and keep the children enrolled at city b public school and in due course at l school. (h) passport and international travel orders.   communication with the children, exchange of information between parents, restraints against denigration or showing the children any documents relating to these proceedings, or communicating through the children. (g) parents enrol and keep the children enrolled at city b public school and in due course at l school. (h) passport and international travel orders.   parents enrol and keep the children enrolled at city b public school and in due course at l school. (h) passport and international travel orders.   passport and international travel orders.
the mother’s proposal  that parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, and that in the event that the parents are unable to reach agreement about children’s enrolment at school and treatment for health then the mother have authority to make the final decision. (b) that the two younger children, y and z remain enrolled at the e school (“e school”) at city b for their primary school education, and unless agreed by the parties in writing x continue to attend at city b school for the duration of her primary school education. (c) that the three children attend e school for their high school education, unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing. (d) that the children live with the mother. (e) that the children spend time with the father on a fortnightly regime as follows: week a – from 3.00 pm thursday or conclusion of school until the following friday at 3.00 pm, week b – from 3.00 pm thursday or the conclusion of school until the following sunday at 4.00 pm. (f) that the children spend time with the father for the first week of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods, and during specific periods during the christmas summer school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year, and in 2023 and each alternate year. (g) that the children spend time with the parents on special occasions including the parents birthdays, the children’s birthdays, mother’s day and father’s day. (h) orders for information exchange, non-denigration orders along similar lines as those sought by the father.   that the two younger children, y and z remain enrolled at the e school (“e school”) at city b for their primary school education, and unless agreed by the parties in writing x continue to attend at city b school for the duration of her primary school education. (c) that the three children attend e school for their high school education, unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing. (d) that the children live with the mother. (e) that the children spend time with the father on a fortnightly regime as follows: week a – from 3.00 pm thursday or conclusion of school until the following friday at 3.00 pm, week b – from 3.00 pm thursday or the conclusion of school until the following sunday at 4.00 pm. (f) that the children spend time with the father for the first week of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods, and during specific periods during the christmas summer school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year, and in 2023 and each alternate year. (g) that the children spend time with the parents on special occasions including the parents birthdays, the children’s birthdays, mother’s day and father’s day. (h) orders for information exchange, non-denigration orders along similar lines as those sought by the father.   that the three children attend e school for their high school education, unless otherwise agreed between the parents in writing. (d) that the children live with the mother. (e) that the children spend time with the father on a fortnightly regime as follows: week a – from 3.00 pm thursday or conclusion of school until the following friday at 3.00 pm, week b – from 3.00 pm thursday or the conclusion of school until the following sunday at 4.00 pm. (f) that the children spend time with the father for the first week of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods, and during specific periods during the christmas summer school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year, and in 2023 and each alternate year. (g) that the children spend time with the parents on special occasions including the parents birthdays, the children’s birthdays, mother’s day and father’s day. (h) orders for information exchange, non-denigration orders along similar lines as those sought by the father.   that the children live with the mother. (e) that the children spend time with the father on a fortnightly regime as follows: week a – from 3.00 pm thursday or conclusion of school until the following friday at 3.00 pm, week b – from 3.00 pm thursday or the conclusion of school until the following sunday at 4.00 pm. (f) that the children spend time with the father for the first week of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods, and during specific periods during the christmas summer school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year, and in 2023 and each alternate year. (g) that the children spend time with the parents on special occasions including the parents birthdays, the children’s birthdays, mother’s day and father’s day. (h) orders for information exchange, non-denigration orders along similar lines as those sought by the father.   that the children spend time with the father on a fortnightly regime as follows: week a – from 3.00 pm thursday or conclusion of school until the following friday at 3.00 pm, week b – from 3.00 pm thursday or the conclusion of school until the following sunday at 4.00 pm. (f) that the children spend time with the father for the first week of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods, and during specific periods during the christmas summer school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year, and in 2023 and each alternate year. (g) that the children spend time with the parents on special occasions including the parents birthdays, the children’s birthdays, mother’s day and father’s day. (h) orders for information exchange, non-denigration orders along similar lines as those sought by the father.   that the children spend time with the father for the first week of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods, and during specific periods during the christmas summer school holidays in 2022 and each alternate year, and in 2023 and each alternate year. (g) that the children spend time with the parents on special occasions including the parents birthdays, the children’s birthdays, mother’s day and father’s day. (h) orders for information exchange, non-denigration orders along similar lines as those sought by the father.   that the children spend time with the parents on special occasions including the parents birthdays, the children’s birthdays, mother’s day and father’s day. (h) orders for information exchange, non-denigration orders along similar lines as those sought by the father.   orders for information exchange, non-denigration orders along similar lines as those sought by the father.
the legal principles
the objects of this part are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by: (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. (2) the principles underlying these objects are that (except when it is or would be contrary to a child's best interests): (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
“in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, the court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.”   how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents' current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents' current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant. note: paragraph (c) reference to future capacity--the court has power under section 13c to make orders for parties to attend family counselling or family dispute resolution or participate in courses, programs or services.
1. the best interests of the child is the paramount consideration, having regard to the relevant matters in s.60cc (3) of the act, 2. there is no legal presumption in favour of the residence parent and, correspondingly, no onus faced by the other parent, however the reality of the child residing with one parent is relevant, 3. where prima facie two schools are satisfactory, weight should be accorded to a school that is closer, and 4. the objects and the principles underlying the objects in 60b should be taken into account.
the trial
the father’s evidence
“[ms stanbury] and i separated on 13 march 2020 and on 10 april 2020 [ms stanbury] left the former matrimonial home at [m street, city b] and went to live with her parents...[ms stanbury] also removed the children from the home without any prior consultation with me.”
“on 10 april 2020, [ms stanbury] made the unilateral decision to remove the children from the home. on that date i came home to find the children’s clothing, toys, car seats and other belongings had been taken from the house.”
“...significantly reduced my time with the children and started to make onerous demands that my time with them be supervised without providing evidence why...i do not misuse alcohol...”
“i would like to kids to spend some time with me at home today at 3.30 pm. i would like you to drop them off...”
the mother responded:
“as i already mentioned, i would like you to give the kids at least a week to settle in here first. i do not want to stop them from seeing you. you and your mum are more than welcome to visit them out here for now.”
“...again offer[ed] no justification as why my time with the children was to be only one hour long and supervised by [ms stanbury]’s parents at their home.”[8].
“our client proposes the following to occur for the child, [y]’s birthday: that the father is welcome to attend the home of the children, situated at [n street, city b], at 4.00 pm for birthday celebrations. it is anticipated such birthday celebrations will take place between 4.00 pm to 5.00 pm. only family members will be present. the father is welcome to bring a support person or, in circumstances where his parents are at [city b], they are also welcome to attend the event. the father will continue to spend time with the children on sunday, between the hours of 2.00 pm and 4.00 pm, at [n street, city b.”
“...received a text message from [ms stanbury] at 3.22pm saying, “does it suit for the kids to facetime now? we wont be able to do at 5.30pm” i was working and unable to facetime until 5.30pm. when i attempted to facetime at 5.30pm there was no answer”.
“i commenced working fulltime in my own business so that i could have greater flexibility and time with the children”[13] and “... because i am self-employed, i have flexible working arrangements and i am readily available to provide routine and stability for the children as well as to spend quality time with them”.[14]
“between our separation in april 2020 and when interim orders were made on 16 march 2021, [ms stanbury] only permitted [y] to stay overnight in my care on one occasion, and the children all together on nine occasions”.
“i am after a interim arrangement until court. i have made myself very clear on my position of your proposed plan. unless there are substantial changes, i will not be agreeing to it...” [15]
“unilateral medical decision ...that the children would not receive their recommended childhood vaccinations” [16]
“in about april 2020 [ms stanbury] unilaterally enrolled... [z] in [e school]... for the pre-school year commencing january 2021. prior to separation we agreed that he would attend the pre-school because they did not require his immunisations to be up to date unlike the community pre-schools.”[21]
the mother’s evidence   the impact on z. she says that z does not cope well with a change of routine and often takes days to settle, (b) the three children come home from holiday time with the father tired and unsettled, and y’s allergic rhinitis flares up, and (c) y has told the mother that she misses her. in june and july 2022 y had facetime calls with the mother from the father’s home to settle herself before sleep, and the mother says that it takes 2-3 days for y to settle back into her routine at home after spending time with the father.   the three children come home from holiday time with the father tired and unsettled, and y’s allergic rhinitis flares up, and (c) y has told the mother that she misses her. in june and july 2022 y had facetime calls with the mother from the father’s home to settle herself before sleep, and the mother says that it takes 2-3 days for y to settle back into her routine at home after spending time with the father.   y has told the mother that she misses her. in june and july 2022 y had facetime calls with the mother from the father’s home to settle herself before sleep, and the mother says that it takes 2-3 days for y to settle back into her routine at home after spending time with the father.
ms j - the maternal grandmother
“i will continue in assisting [ms stanbury] with paying the school fees and with other expenses as best to assist [x], [y] and [z].”
child inclusive conference memorandum – family consultant mr k
“...questioned the effectiveness of the medication and appeared nonchalant about his inconsistent compliance with his medication.”
“...that the children’s exposure to parental conflict has the potential to damage one or both parent/child relationships as children grow older...exposure to parental conflict can also impact on children’s general development, including their emotional and psychological wellbeing, and their education and social development.”   the issue of religion and not wanting the children’s education to be taught with creationism as a fundamental value and noting neither parent is christian – the mother identified as christian and reports attending a christian church without the children, (b) wanting the children to share their schooling experience through attending his preferred school, and (c) the issue of affordability of school fees for e school, questioning the maternal grandparent’s ability to consistently support this and noting the mother’s inability to afford this herself.   wanting the children to share their schooling experience through attending his preferred school, and (c) the issue of affordability of school fees for e school, questioning the maternal grandparent’s ability to consistently support this and noting the mother’s inability to afford this herself.   the issue of affordability of school fees for e school, questioning the maternal grandparent’s ability to consistently support this and noting the mother’s inability to afford this herself.
primary considerations
s. 60cc (2) (a) benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents
s.60cc (2) (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse neglect of family violence
relevant additional considerations
s.60cc (3) (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
s.60cc (3) (b) the nature of the relationship of the child to:(i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) relatives (or other relevant persons)
s.60cc (3) (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity:(i) to participate in making decisions about major long term issues in relation to the child, and(ii) to spend time with the child, and(iii) to communicate with the child
s.60cc (3) (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child
s.60cc (3) (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:(i) either of the parents, or(ii) any other child, or other person, with whom he or she has been living
equal time
“the children currently live with the mother and spend time with the father generally consistent with the current order. it appears generally they agree the children have adjusted to the current arrangement and that they have a good relationship with both parents currently.”[42]
schooling
“once again please accept our apologies for the matters you raised and we look forward to strengthening our relationship with you and your children here at [e school]”.
s.60cc (3) (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
s.60cc (3) (f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person, to provide for the needs of the child including emotional and intellectual needs
s.60cc (3) (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the child and of either of the child’s parents and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant
s.60cc (3) (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents
s.60cc (3) (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family
s.60cc (3) (k) if a family violence order applies
s.60cc (3) (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
s.60cc (3) (m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks relevantpassports and international travel
australian passports act 2005 - sect 11reasons relating to child without parental consent or court order for travel  the minister must not issue an australian travel document to a child unless: (a) each person who has parental responsibility for the child consents to the child having an australian travel document, or (b) an order of a court of the commonwealth, a state or a territory permits: (i) the child to have an australian travel document, or (ii) the child to travel internationally, or (iii) the child to live or spend time with another person who is outside australia. (2) subsection (1) does not prevent the minister from issuing an australian travel document to a child if: (a) circumstances specified in a minister's determination as special circumstances exist, or (b) the minister is satisfied that the child's welfare (physical or psychological) would be adversely affected if the child were not able to travel internationally, or (c) the minister is satisfied that: (i) the child urgently needs to travel internationally because of a family crisis, and (ii) if there is a person who has parental responsibility for the child and who has not consented to the child having an australian travel document--it is not possible to contact that person within a reasonable period, or (d) in the case of a child who is outside australia--the child departed australia less than 12 months before the application for the australian travel document was made and the minister considers that an australian travel document should be issued to enable the child's return to australia. (3) if the minister refuses to issue an australian travel document to a child, the minister may declare that he or she is refusing to exercise the discretion under subsection (2) because the matter should be dealt with by a court. (5) for the purposes of this section, a person has parental responsibility for a child if, and only if: (a) the person: (i) is the child's parent (including a person who is presumed to be the child's parent because of a presumption (other than in section 69q) in subdivision d of division 12 of part vii of the family law act 1975 ), and (ii) has not ceased to have parental responsibility for the child because of an order made under the family law act 1975 , or (aa) the person: (i) is the child's parent (including a person who is presumed to be the child's parent because of a presumption (other than in section 189) in subdivision 3 of division 11 of part 5 of the family court act 1997 (wa)), and (ii) has not ceased to have parental responsibility for the child because of an order made under that act, or (b) under a parenting order: (i) the child is to live with the person, or (ii) the person has parental responsibility for the child, or (d) the person has guardianship or custody of, or has parental responsibility for, the child under a law of the commonwealth, a state or a territory. note: the presumptions in the family law act 1975 and the family court act 1997 (wa) include a presumption arising from a court finding that a person is the child's parent, and a presumption arising from a man executing an instrument under law acknowledging that he is the father of the child. his honour riethmuller j[48] set out the following guidelines which apply where a person with parental responsibility for a child, by court order or through paternity or maternity, seeks to have a passport issue for a child: “ordinarily application should be made to the minister for a passport with the consent of the other parent (or person with parental responsibility). application for the issue of a passport without the consent of the other parent (or person with parental responsibility) should be made to the minister unless: the other person is objecting to the issue of a passport, there are court orders restraining the child’s travel, such as an airport watch-list order, or there is another good reason why the administrative process would not provide an appropriate remedy, or the administrative process has resulted in a refusal to issue a passport. where application is made to the court the supporting material ought to set out why the administrative process is unsuitable and provide appropriate evidence. applications need to also address the relevant factors under part vii of the family law act. applications to the court must be served upon the other parent (or person with parental responsibility) unless orders are obtained for substituted service or, in the exceptional case, that service be dispensed with. applications for substituted service, or to dispense with service, should be supported by clear and detailed material.”
allocation of parental responsibility for the children  this section applies if, under a parenting order: (a) 2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long-term issue in relation to the child. (2) the order is taken to require the decision to be made jointly by those persons. note: subject to any court orders, decisions about issues that are not major long-term issues are made by the person with whom the child is spending time without a need to consult the other person (see section 65dae). (3) the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue. (4) to avoid doubt, this section does not require any other person to establish, before acting on a decision about the child communicated by one of those persons, that the decision has been made jointly. section 4 of the act defines "major long-term issues" as follows: “ “major long term issues” in relation to a child, means issues about the care, welfare and development of the child of a long-term nature and includes (but is not limited to) issues of that nature about: (a) the child's education (both current and future), and (b) the child's religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child's health, and (d) the child's name, and (e) changes to the child's living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.
major long term decisions concerning the children’s health
“the parties evidence of what they say various public health bodies have said, and to the contents of the two pamphlets or articles annexed to the mother’s affidavit”[50]
“it is important to note from the outset that the information to which the section refers is of a kind not reasonably open to question and is capable of verification from authoritative source.” “in practice there would be few issues in respect of which reference to extrinsic materials would not be “reasonably open to question.” “a more recent example is in mains & redden [2011] famcafc 184 which involved consideration of whether administering a number of conventional and almost universally administered vaccinations of children against a variety of conditions was in the child’s best interest. the conflict of expert opinion evidence in relation to the benefits and risks of immunisation precluded any prospect of the court taking “judicial notice” under s.144 of the evidence act. if an issue in proceedings is controversial, it is almost inevitable that there will be differing credible expert opinions in relation to it and demonstrably it would not fall within the operation of s. 144.”   these provisions of the evidence act 1995 do not apply to child-related proceedings: (a) divisions 3, 4 and 5 of part 2.1 (which deal with general rules about giving evidence, examination in chief, re-examination and cross-examination), other than sections 26, 30, 36 and 41, note: section 26 is about the court's control over questioning of witnesses. section 30 is about interpreters. section 36 relates to examination of a person without subpoena or other process. section 41 is about improper questions. (b) parts 2.2 and 2.3 (which deal with documents and other evidence including demonstrations, experiments and inspections), (c) parts 3.2 to 3.8 (which deal with hearsay, opinion, admissions, evidence of judgments and convictions, tendency and coincidence, credibility and character). (2) the court may give such weight (if any) as it thinks fit to evidence admitted as a consequence of a provision of the evidence act 1995 not applying because of subsection (1). (3) despite subsection (1), the court may decide to apply one or more of the provisions of a division or part mentioned in that subsection to an issue in the proceedings, if: (a) the court is satisfied that the circumstances are exceptional, and (b) the court has taken into account (in addition to any other matters the court thinks relevant): (i) the importance of the evidence in the proceedings, and (ii) the nature of the subject matter of the proceedings, and (iii) the probative value of the evidence, and (iv) the powers of the court (if any) to adjourn the hearing, to make another order or to give a direction in relation to the evidence. (4) if the court decides to apply a provision of a division or part mentioned in subsection (1) to an issue in the proceedings, the court may give such weight (if any) as it thinks fit to evidence admitted as a consequence of the provision applying. (5) subsection (1) does not revive the operation of: (a) a rule of common law, or (b) a law of a state or a territory, that, but for subsection (1), would have been prevented from operating because of a provision of a division or part mentioned in that subsection.
“the parties hearsay and opinion evidence about what public health bodies have said about the covid19 vaccination safety for children, including the articles, as well as the mother’s opinion evidence about the child’s health and the risks ...was admissible.”[52]
and that
“ the question of what weight is to be given to evidence once admitted is a separated step”
which
“takes on particular significance where... evidence which is admitted only by operation of s 69zt(1) may, by subsection (2), be given “such weight (if any) as the court thinks fit.”[53]
“ in the absence of any relevant qualifications of either party to give opinion evidence about this complex issue i do not consider it appropriate to give any weight to either of their opinions on the medical and public health issues associated with covid19 infection or vaccination”[54]
conclusion
associate: dated: 16 december 2022
dated: 16 december 2022
[1] father’s affidavit paragraph 7 and 10[2] exhibt e[3] [2000] famca 462 at [65]- [66]; [2000] famca 462; (2000) 26 fam lr 143; flc 93-025[4] [2011]famcafc 138[5] exhibit e[6] father’s affidavit paragraph 14[7] exhibit a[8] father’s affidavit paragraph 20[9] at annexure b[10] father’s affidavit paragraph 24[11] father’s affidavit paragraph 19[12] father’s affidavit paragraph 26[13] father’s affidavit paragraph 8[14] father’s affidavit paragraph 77[15] exhibit b[16] father’s affidavit paragraph 32[17] father’s affidavit paragraph 34[18] father’s affidavit paragraph 35[19] father’s affidavit paragraph 38[20] father’s affidavit paragraph 42[21] father’s affidavit paragraph 44[22] mother’s affidavit annexure 15a[23] father’s affidavit annexure m[24] exhibit g[25] mother’s affidavit paragraph 67[26] mother’s affidavit paragraph 82-83[27] mother’s affidavit paragraph 83[28] mother’s affidavit paragraph 84[29] mother’s affidavit paragraph 85-86[30] mother’s affidavit paragraph 87(b)[31] mother’s affidavit paragraph 96[32] mother’s affidavit paragraph 97[33] mother’s affidavit paragraphs 99-145[34] mother’s affidavit paragraph 181[35] mother’s affidavit annexure 17[36] mother’s affidavit paragraph 183-192[37] exhibit e and exhibit k[38] mother’s affidavit paragraph 146[39] including in exhibits a, b, f & g[40] father’s affidavit paragraph 10, 37[41] father’s affidavit paragraph 77-78[42] exhibit e paragraph 20[43] father’s affidavit annexure j [44] father’s affidavit annexure k[45] father’s affidavit paragraph 84[46] s. 60cc(3)(i)[47] [2008] fmcafam 1031 (18 september 2008)[48] in re childs passport application at [9][49] palange & kalhoun at paragraph 57[50] ibid at paragraphs 63- 69[51] ibid at paragraphs 70-84 [52] ibid paragraph 101[53] ibid paragraph 103[54] ibid paragraph 109[55] ibid paragraph 110[56] ibid paragraph 111[57] ibid paragraph 112[58] judge smith quoted from donnell & dovey [2010] famcafc 15 [210]-[2017][59] mother’s affidavit paragraphs 99-101, 107-117