last updated: 11 september 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
harmon & ventura [2023] fedcfamc2f 16
orders
the court orders that:  subject to order 3(c) and until the mother is drug free as established by orders 5 and 7 herein, each alternate weekend from 10.00am thursday until 3.30pm monday commencing 19 january 2023, save that upon x commencing school and this time falling during school term, time will commence at the conclusion of school on thursday and conclude at the commencement of school on monday, (b) subject to order 3(c), time in accordance with orders 9 and 13 herein, (c) during all times spent between x and the mother, either ms b or ms c or such other person as may be agreed in writing between the parents be in substantial attendance until the mother ceases all illicit substance use, (d) by facetime on each monday and thursday at 7.00pm when x is not in the mother’s care, and (e) at such further or other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents.   subject to order 3(c), time in accordance with orders 9 and 13 herein, (c) during all times spent between x and the mother, either ms b or ms c or such other person as may be agreed in writing between the parents be in substantial attendance until the mother ceases all illicit substance use, (d) by facetime on each monday and thursday at 7.00pm when x is not in the mother’s care, and (e) at such further or other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents.   during all times spent between x and the mother, either ms b or ms c or such other person as may be agreed in writing between the parents be in substantial attendance until the mother ceases all illicit substance use, (d) by facetime on each monday and thursday at 7.00pm when x is not in the mother’s care, and (e) at such further or other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents.   by facetime on each monday and thursday at 7.00pm when x is not in the mother’s care, and (e) at such further or other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents.   at such further or other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents.   the mother is required to maintain her hair at a length of not less than 4 centimetres, neither head hair nor body hair is to be cut, bleached or dyed between the date of this order and the time of collection of hair, (b) each parent or their legal representative is at liberty to provide the clinic with a copy of these orders, (c) written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug testing purposes may be sent to the mother care of her solicitor’s email address and in the event the mother does not have a lawyer then notice be given addressing the request via the mother’s email address or by sms text message to the mother’s mobile phone number and shall be deemed to have been received by the mother on the date and time it is sent via email or sms, (d) the mother is to attend the clinic and submit to the supervised collection of hair sample from her at the earliest available appointment time within seven days of receiving written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug testing purposes from the father or his legal representative, (e) the mother is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order, also hereby authorising the clinic to provide the results of each test to the father and/or his lawyer, if any, upon receipt of such test results, and (f) the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opiates and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required.   each parent or their legal representative is at liberty to provide the clinic with a copy of these orders, (c) written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug testing purposes may be sent to the mother care of her solicitor’s email address and in the event the mother does not have a lawyer then notice be given addressing the request via the mother’s email address or by sms text message to the mother’s mobile phone number and shall be deemed to have been received by the mother on the date and time it is sent via email or sms, (d) the mother is to attend the clinic and submit to the supervised collection of hair sample from her at the earliest available appointment time within seven days of receiving written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug testing purposes from the father or his legal representative, (e) the mother is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order, also hereby authorising the clinic to provide the results of each test to the father and/or his lawyer, if any, upon receipt of such test results, and (f) the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opiates and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required.   written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug testing purposes may be sent to the mother care of her solicitor’s email address and in the event the mother does not have a lawyer then notice be given addressing the request via the mother’s email address or by sms text message to the mother’s mobile phone number and shall be deemed to have been received by the mother on the date and time it is sent via email or sms, (d) the mother is to attend the clinic and submit to the supervised collection of hair sample from her at the earliest available appointment time within seven days of receiving written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug testing purposes from the father or his legal representative, (e) the mother is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order, also hereby authorising the clinic to provide the results of each test to the father and/or his lawyer, if any, upon receipt of such test results, and (f) the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opiates and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required.   the mother is to attend the clinic and submit to the supervised collection of hair sample from her at the earliest available appointment time within seven days of receiving written notice to undertake hair collection for hair drug testing purposes from the father or his legal representative, (e) the mother is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order, also hereby authorising the clinic to provide the results of each test to the father and/or his lawyer, if any, upon receipt of such test results, and (f) the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opiates and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required.   the mother is to provide the collector with photographic identification to be recorded before each hair collection and authority, with this order, also hereby authorising the clinic to provide the results of each test to the father and/or his lawyer, if any, upon receipt of such test results, and (f) the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opiates and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required.   the hair drug test may screen for drugs of abuse including amphetamine-type substances and metabolites, cannabis and metabolites, cocaine and metabolites, opiates and metabolites and any other drug specified in this order as required.   each fortnight during school terms from the conclusion of school thursday or 5.30pm if a student free day to the commencement of school monday or 5.00pm if a student free day, (b) for half of the term school holidays as agreed between the parents in writing and failing agreement the first half commencing from the last day of school to 5.00pm on the saturday at the mid-point of the term holidays, (c) for half of the christmas school holidays as agreed between the parents in writing and failing agreement on a week about basis, (d) the mother shall communicate with x by facetime on each monday and thursday at 7.00pm when x is not in her care, and (e) at such further or other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents.   for half of the term school holidays as agreed between the parents in writing and failing agreement the first half commencing from the last day of school to 5.00pm on the saturday at the mid-point of the term holidays, (c) for half of the christmas school holidays as agreed between the parents in writing and failing agreement on a week about basis, (d) the mother shall communicate with x by facetime on each monday and thursday at 7.00pm when x is not in her care, and (e) at such further or other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents.   for half of the christmas school holidays as agreed between the parents in writing and failing agreement on a week about basis, (d) the mother shall communicate with x by facetime on each monday and thursday at 7.00pm when x is not in her care, and (e) at such further or other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents.   the mother shall communicate with x by facetime on each monday and thursday at 7.00pm when x is not in her care, and (e) at such further or other times as may be agreed in writing between the parents.   x spend time with the mother in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter from 12noon christmas day until 12noon on boxing day and with the father from 12noon christmas eve to 12noon christmas day and in each alternate year thereafter, and (b) x spend time with the mother in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter from 12noon christmas eve to 12noon on christmas day and with the father from 12noon christmas day to 12noon boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter.   x spend time with the mother in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter from 12noon christmas eve to 12noon on christmas day and with the father from 12noon christmas day to 12noon boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge boymal
introduction  whether interim or final orders should be made, (b) whether the parents forthwith have equal shared parental responsibility for x or whether the father have sole parental responsibility until the mother is free of illicit substances, (c) whether x continues to live with the father and spends time with the mother or whether x lives with the mother and spends time with the father, and (d) whether x commences his primary school education or continues to attend kindergarten in 2023.   whether the parents forthwith have equal shared parental responsibility for x or whether the father have sole parental responsibility until the mother is free of illicit substances, (c) whether x continues to live with the father and spends time with the mother or whether x lives with the mother and spends time with the father, and (d) whether x commences his primary school education or continues to attend kindergarten in 2023.   whether x continues to live with the father and spends time with the mother or whether x lives with the mother and spends time with the father, and (d) whether x commences his primary school education or continues to attend kindergarten in 2023.   whether x commences his primary school education or continues to attend kindergarten in 2023.
background
the hearing
the proposals  the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for x, (b) x live with the mother, (c) x spend time with the father each alternate week from thursday until monday and in the other week from wednesday until thursday. once x starts school and unless the school is within 25 kilometres of the father’s home time on the alternate weekend concludes on sunday and there is no time in the other week. time also to occur during school holidays and on special occasions, and (d) x attend kindergarten in 2023.   x live with the mother, (c) x spend time with the father each alternate week from thursday until monday and in the other week from wednesday until thursday. once x starts school and unless the school is within 25 kilometres of the father’s home time on the alternate weekend concludes on sunday and there is no time in the other week. time also to occur during school holidays and on special occasions, and (d) x attend kindergarten in 2023.   x spend time with the father each alternate week from thursday until monday and in the other week from wednesday until thursday. once x starts school and unless the school is within 25 kilometres of the father’s home time on the alternate weekend concludes on sunday and there is no time in the other week. time also to occur during school holidays and on special occasions, and (d) x attend kindergarten in 2023.   x attend kindergarten in 2023.   the father have sole parental responsibility for x until the mother provides two consecutive clear hair follicle drug test results within a 12 month period or if the father fails to seek the mother undertake a hair follicle test. thereafter the parents have equal shared parental responsibility, (b) x live with the father, (c) x spend time with the mother each alternate week from thursday until monday and on special occasions under the condition of substantial attendance until she provides two consecutive clear hair follicle drug test results within a 12 month period, (d) upon there being two consecutive clear hair follicle test results the condition of substantial attendance no longer apply, and x spend time with the mother each alternate week from thursday to monday, half of all school holidays and on special occasions, (e) the father be permitted on two occasions in each 12 month period to request the mother undertake a hair follicle test, (f) if the mother fails to undertake a requested hair follicle test or produces a test positive for illicit substances x’s time with the mother reverts to time pursuant to the condition of substantial attendance and the father have sole parental responsibility, and (g) x commence at e school in 2023.   x live with the father, (c) x spend time with the mother each alternate week from thursday until monday and on special occasions under the condition of substantial attendance until she provides two consecutive clear hair follicle drug test results within a 12 month period, (d) upon there being two consecutive clear hair follicle test results the condition of substantial attendance no longer apply, and x spend time with the mother each alternate week from thursday to monday, half of all school holidays and on special occasions, (e) the father be permitted on two occasions in each 12 month period to request the mother undertake a hair follicle test, (f) if the mother fails to undertake a requested hair follicle test or produces a test positive for illicit substances x’s time with the mother reverts to time pursuant to the condition of substantial attendance and the father have sole parental responsibility, and (g) x commence at e school in 2023.   x spend time with the mother each alternate week from thursday until monday and on special occasions under the condition of substantial attendance until she provides two consecutive clear hair follicle drug test results within a 12 month period, (d) upon there being two consecutive clear hair follicle test results the condition of substantial attendance no longer apply, and x spend time with the mother each alternate week from thursday to monday, half of all school holidays and on special occasions, (e) the father be permitted on two occasions in each 12 month period to request the mother undertake a hair follicle test, (f) if the mother fails to undertake a requested hair follicle test or produces a test positive for illicit substances x’s time with the mother reverts to time pursuant to the condition of substantial attendance and the father have sole parental responsibility, and (g) x commence at e school in 2023.   upon there being two consecutive clear hair follicle test results the condition of substantial attendance no longer apply, and x spend time with the mother each alternate week from thursday to monday, half of all school holidays and on special occasions, (e) the father be permitted on two occasions in each 12 month period to request the mother undertake a hair follicle test, (f) if the mother fails to undertake a requested hair follicle test or produces a test positive for illicit substances x’s time with the mother reverts to time pursuant to the condition of substantial attendance and the father have sole parental responsibility, and (g) x commence at e school in 2023.   the father be permitted on two occasions in each 12 month period to request the mother undertake a hair follicle test, (f) if the mother fails to undertake a requested hair follicle test or produces a test positive for illicit substances x’s time with the mother reverts to time pursuant to the condition of substantial attendance and the father have sole parental responsibility, and (g) x commence at e school in 2023.   if the mother fails to undertake a requested hair follicle test or produces a test positive for illicit substances x’s time with the mother reverts to time pursuant to the condition of substantial attendance and the father have sole parental responsibility, and (g) x commence at e school in 2023.   x commence at e school in 2023.
the evidence
mr g
salient to the current matters is [ms b]’s mental health and substance use. [ms b] has experienced episodes of mental health instability, including suicidal ideation. she reported difficulties with feelings of rejection and abandonment. she described being emotionally reactive, sensitive interpersonally and ruminating on negative evaluation.[2]   acknowledged a history of poly-substance abuse whilst socialising including illicit drugs. she has also tried cannabis, illicit drugs and alcohol, (b) disclosed binging on illicit drugs on at least one weekend a month toward the end of 2020 in the company of associates, (c) reported substance use assisted her to regulate her emotions. she experiences emotions intensely and can respond recklessly and impulsively when overwhelmed, and (d) acknowledged a history of positive drug screens and not having remained current with respect to ongoing drug screens.   disclosed binging on illicit drugs on at least one weekend a month toward the end of 2020 in the company of associates, (c) reported substance use assisted her to regulate her emotions. she experiences emotions intensely and can respond recklessly and impulsively when overwhelmed, and (d) acknowledged a history of positive drug screens and not having remained current with respect to ongoing drug screens.   reported substance use assisted her to regulate her emotions. she experiences emotions intensely and can respond recklessly and impulsively when overwhelmed, and (d) acknowledged a history of positive drug screens and not having remained current with respect to ongoing drug screens.   acknowledged a history of positive drug screens and not having remained current with respect to ongoing drug screens.
based on the balance of [ms b]’s identified parenting strengths and needs ratings her psychological and psychosocial risk factors are estimated to fall in the high-risk range currently.[3]
...should be gradually increased based on [ms b]’s progress in treatment and in reducing her substance use. progress could potentially be reviewed by [ms b]’s treating practitioner/case manager at intervals to the court, or to an appointed independent children’s lawyer (icl). urinalysis or hair follicle testing may be required to determine the nature and extent of [ms b]’s substance use.[4]
ms j  unless the court determines that x is at an unacceptable risk of harm in the mother’s unsupervised care then x’s time with the mother increase. provided the mother maintains her supports and her illicit substances use continues to reduce or if she is currently abstinent, by the second week of december 2022 x live in the mother’s primary care. x’s time with the father be supervised if he returns a drug screen testing positive for illicit substances, and (b) if the court determines that x is at an unacceptable risk in the mother’s primary care and the father has demonstrated he does not use illicit substances then x live with the father and spend unsupervised time with the mother if she has low or no current substance use problems.   if the court determines that x is at an unacceptable risk in the mother’s primary care and the father has demonstrated he does not use illicit substances then x live with the father and spend unsupervised time with the mother if she has low or no current substance use problems.
icl: is it fair to say, in summary, that you believe the mother, on your observations, had a far superior parenting style to [x] than the father? [ms j]: well, yes. in terms of emotional attunement. yes. icl: having heard what counsel for the father has said about the evidence given by the mother about her recent drug use on [illicit drugs], about the fact she has got pending criminal charges on drug possessions, on issues in relation to loss of her licence for drug use, do you think that recent drug history should trump or be regarded as more important than those two parenting styles you’ve mentioned there? in other words, is the risk to the child from the mother by use of that drug use, which has been admitted in court, something that should be of more concern to the court than the...? [ms j]: i think it should be of serious concern. yes. icl: and in fact, do you believe, having heard everything here today, that the child should live primarily with the father and see the mother under more restricted circumstances? [ms j]: well, yes.
the father
it can thus be seen that it was not the task of the trial judge to mould or create, by the exercise of discretionary powers, the most desirable solution or desirable circumstances, blind or indifferent to each parent’s fundamental right to exercise their respective rights to choose where they lived and worked consistent with the child’s best interests. rather, those rights were to be respected. only if the exercise of such parental rights could be seen as so adversely affecting the child’s best interests could interference with their exercise be legitimate, and then only to the extent necessary to avoid such adverse effects, having considered available alternatives.
ms q
the mother  illicit drugs in her handbag, (b) illicit drugs in the passenger side door of her car, and (c) in the passenger side foot well of her car, a plastic basket containing a small plastic pouch with $120.00 cash inside, a notebook with writing of liquid and dollar value amounts indicating drug trafficking activity. two small zip lock bags containing approximately 2 grams of illicit drugs, a rectangular clear plastic container containing a number of empty small plastic zip lock bags and a small plastic tub which contained approximately 2 grams of illicit drugs were also found.   illicit drugs in the passenger side door of her car, and (c) in the passenger side foot well of her car, a plastic basket containing a small plastic pouch with $120.00 cash inside, a notebook with writing of liquid and dollar value amounts indicating drug trafficking activity. two small zip lock bags containing approximately 2 grams of illicit drugs, a rectangular clear plastic container containing a number of empty small plastic zip lock bags and a small plastic tub which contained approximately 2 grams of illicit drugs were also found.   in the passenger side foot well of her car, a plastic basket containing a small plastic pouch with $120.00 cash inside, a notebook with writing of liquid and dollar value amounts indicating drug trafficking activity. two small zip lock bags containing approximately 2 grams of illicit drugs, a rectangular clear plastic container containing a number of empty small plastic zip lock bags and a small plastic tub which contained approximately 2 grams of illicit drugs were also found.   drug paraphernalia in the foot well of her car and several empty small zip lock bags, and (b) approximately $300 cash and illicit drugs in the mother’s bag.   approximately $300 cash and illicit drugs in the mother’s bag.
i freely admit and regret using recreational drugs in the past. i now understand that this drug use was part of self-medicating for trauma and related mental health issues. these matters are in hand now with the correct supports in place and an adjustment to my anti-depressant medication ...... [x] will be safe in my care. i have provided a clean drug result. i have provided medical evidence from my doctors. there is no risk to [x]’s safety or welfare while in my care.
i freely admit and regret using recreational drugs in the past. i now understand that this drug use was part of self-medicating for trauma and related mental health issues. these matters are in hand now with the correct supports in place and an adjustment to my anti-depressant medication.[6]   she does not have a psychiatrist. she had a brief intervention by a psychiatrist upon the catt intervention, (b) she has never done an alcohol and drug course, and (c) she sees her counsellor, ms u, for her mental illness. the mother has not seen ms u for two months. there is no report from ms u. it is not clear what are her qualifications.   she has never done an alcohol and drug course, and (c) she sees her counsellor, ms u, for her mental illness. the mother has not seen ms u for two months. there is no report from ms u. it is not clear what are her qualifications.   she sees her counsellor, ms u, for her mental illness. the mother has not seen ms u for two months. there is no report from ms u. it is not clear what are her qualifications.   has not provided results for hair follicle testing or urine tests for illicit substances since 15 july 2021 at the random request of the icl. in closing submissions counsel for the mother said that in her brief she had a urine screen test of the mother undertaken in september 2022 which tested negative for illicit substance. that test result would not have assisted the mother given the mother’s admission of using illicit substances in early september 2022. it would have been disingenuous and misleading of the mother to rely on that test result as evidence of abstinence of illicit substance use, particularly if cross-examination did not elicit her admission of illicit substances use in early september 2022, (b) has engaged in activity on two occasions which resulted in her being charged with drug related criminal offences, (c) has had illicit substances in her possession, (d) has earned demerit points on two occasions for driving under the influence of drugs, and (e) has failed to provide sufficient independent expert evidence that she has addressed the matters raised by mr g. the services in which she is now engaged are very recent in the context of a long standing illicit substance user. there are also concerns that they are not of the intensity contemplated by mr g.   has engaged in activity on two occasions which resulted in her being charged with drug related criminal offences, (c) has had illicit substances in her possession, (d) has earned demerit points on two occasions for driving under the influence of drugs, and (e) has failed to provide sufficient independent expert evidence that she has addressed the matters raised by mr g. the services in which she is now engaged are very recent in the context of a long standing illicit substance user. there are also concerns that they are not of the intensity contemplated by mr g.   has had illicit substances in her possession, (d) has earned demerit points on two occasions for driving under the influence of drugs, and (e) has failed to provide sufficient independent expert evidence that she has addressed the matters raised by mr g. the services in which she is now engaged are very recent in the context of a long standing illicit substance user. there are also concerns that they are not of the intensity contemplated by mr g.   has earned demerit points on two occasions for driving under the influence of drugs, and (e) has failed to provide sufficient independent expert evidence that she has addressed the matters raised by mr g. the services in which she is now engaged are very recent in the context of a long standing illicit substance user. there are also concerns that they are not of the intensity contemplated by mr g.   has failed to provide sufficient independent expert evidence that she has addressed the matters raised by mr g. the services in which she is now engaged are very recent in the context of a long standing illicit substance user. there are also concerns that they are not of the intensity contemplated by mr g.   using when he is in her care, (b) still being under the influence of illicit substances when using while he is not in her care, and (c) exposing x to drugs and drug paraphernalia and inappropriate people.   still being under the influence of illicit substances when using while he is not in her care, and (c) exposing x to drugs and drug paraphernalia and inappropriate people.   exposing x to drugs and drug paraphernalia and inappropriate people.
ms c  was not aware the police had found illicit drugs in the mother’s wallet in 2020, (b) only knew the basics of the mother’s pending criminal charges, it was “for drugs – not drugs. but getting involved with the wrong people”, (c) was not aware that dffh was involved with the family prior to their involvement in 2021, (d) is of the belief the mother has been using illicit substances for only two years, (e) rejects the concept that the mother is “a junkie or a druggie” as those terms mean “daily usage and stealing”, and (f) does not believe the mother has a drug problem.   only knew the basics of the mother’s pending criminal charges, it was “for drugs – not drugs. but getting involved with the wrong people”, (c) was not aware that dffh was involved with the family prior to their involvement in 2021, (d) is of the belief the mother has been using illicit substances for only two years, (e) rejects the concept that the mother is “a junkie or a druggie” as those terms mean “daily usage and stealing”, and (f) does not believe the mother has a drug problem.   was not aware that dffh was involved with the family prior to their involvement in 2021, (d) is of the belief the mother has been using illicit substances for only two years, (e) rejects the concept that the mother is “a junkie or a druggie” as those terms mean “daily usage and stealing”, and (f) does not believe the mother has a drug problem.   is of the belief the mother has been using illicit substances for only two years, (e) rejects the concept that the mother is “a junkie or a druggie” as those terms mean “daily usage and stealing”, and (f) does not believe the mother has a drug problem.   rejects the concept that the mother is “a junkie or a druggie” as those terms mean “daily usage and stealing”, and (f) does not believe the mother has a drug problem.   does not believe the mother has a drug problem.
ms b
ms dd
legal principles
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.
the considerations
s60cc(2)(a) - benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents
s60cc(2)(b) - the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
s60cc(3)(a)and (g) – views, maturity, other relevant characteristics of the child
s60cc(3)(b) - nature of relationships of the child
s60cc(3)(c) – opportunity and participation in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child and to spend time and communicate with the child
s60cc(3)(ca) - the parent's obligations to maintain the child
s60cc(3)(d) - the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents
s60cc(3)(e) - practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
s60cc(3)(f) - capacity of the child's parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs
s60cc(3)(i) - attitude to the child and to the responsibilities of parenthood
s60cc(3)(j) and (k) - family violence
interim or final orders
so that by the time this could come back for a hearing, your honour would see that she has been completely drug free for a year and that would then give your honour some confidence in making a final order because you would know for sure has this woman been able to move away from drugs. because of course, it’s not ideal at all for any parent to be using drugs when they have children in their care. so at that point, there would be 12 months of knowing how things are going for [x] in the father’s care and how things are going in terms of the risk assessment.[11]
parental responsibility
live with and spend time arrangements
school or kindergarten
other orders
associate: dated: 17 january 2023
dated: 17 january 2023
[1] evidence act 1995 (cth) s 140.[2] psychological evaluation dated 21 february 2022 at [29].[3] psychological evaluation dated 21 february 2022 at [27].[4] ibid at [33]. [5] family report dated 7 september 2022 at [40].[6] mother’s affidavit dated 21 september 2022 at [9].[7] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(1). [8] ibid, s 60ca. [9] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da. [10] ibid, s 65daa. [11] transcript dated 18 november 2022 at page 220.[12] family law act 1975 (cth) s60cc(l).[13] pages 14 to 18 of annexure “h-1” of the mother’s affidavit dated 6 october 2022.[14] slater & light [2013] famcafc 4 at [37].[15] blinko & blinko [2015] famcafc 146 at [83] referring to russell & close (unreported full court, 25 june 1993).[16] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1) and (2).[17] ibid s 65daa(5)(e).[18] ibid s 65daa(3).