last updated: 29 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
raddack & gadoury (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 110
orders
the court orders that:
and the court orders by consent that:
adjournment of final hearing  any amended initiating application setting out with particularity the precise final orders sought, (b) an updated single consolidated trial affidavit, and (c) other witness affidavits upon which they intend to rely.   an updated single consolidated trial affidavit, and (c) other witness affidavits upon which they intend to rely.   other witness affidavits upon which they intend to rely.   any amended response setting out with particularity the precise final orders sought, (b) an updated single consolidated trial affidavit, and (c) other witness affidavits upon which they intend to rely.   the applicant file and serve any affidavit(s) in reply addressing only the evidence presented in the respondents’ affidavits, and (b) the independent children’s lawyer file and serve any affidavits relied upon.   the independent children’s lawyer file and serve any affidavits relied upon.   a list of the material relied upon, (b) a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (c) a summary of contentions as to section 60cc factors relied upon to satisfy the court that it is the best interests of the children to make the orders sought.   a brief chronology listing significant events that are relevant to the issues to be determined by the court, (c) a summary of contentions as to section 60cc factors relied upon to satisfy the court that it is the best interests of the children to make the orders sought.   a summary of contentions as to section 60cc factors relied upon to satisfy the court that it is the best interests of the children to make the orders sought.
paediatric assessments
interim spend-time arrangements
dispute resolution
and the court notes that:
reasons for ex tempore judgment
judge o’shannesy
background
section 92a intervention in child abuse cases (2) each of the following persons is entitled to intervene in the proceedings: ... (e) a person who is alleged to have abused the child or from whom the child is alleged to be at risk of abuse. ...   a person who is alleged to have abused the child or from whom the child is alleged to be at risk of abuse.
... the children presented with developmental delays. they did not appear congruent to their developmental age. they had observable delays in language, cognitions, social, fine and gross motor skill development. this has also been noted since the children commenced kindergarten. the children present as active and could be difficult to manage. [mr raddack] acknowledges he would have trouble in managing the children by himself and it is the writers view that the paternal grandparents provide good practical and emotional support to [mr raddack], they are additional adults committed to care for the children and provide oversight and are a protective factor. ... notwithstanding some of the confusions and lack of clarity around the children’s developmental needs the parents do agree that an arrangement that is continually the same, with clear and reasonable times for handover would be helpful. they both in principle agree that an arrangement whereby the children spend time with [mr raddack] each alternate weekend may enable more routine for the children. while [ms gadoury] is not assured of the paternal grandparent’s involvement wanting [mr raddack] to place himself front and centre as a committed father, it is the writer’s assessment their presence is helpful and a protective factor. it would assist the children if the paternal grandparents could conduct the friday afternoon handover at 4:00pm instead of waiting for [mr raddack] to finish work. ... recommendations it is respectfully recommended and in the absence of any information to the contrary, the court considers the following. ... the children spend time with [mr raddack] at the paternal grandparents home each alternate weekend form 4pm friday until 4pm sunday. the paternal grandparents conduct handover on a friday afternoon if [mr raddack] is unavailable to do so. ...
rule 3.01 necessary parties a person whose rights may be directly affected by an issue in a proceeding, and whose participation as a party is necessary for the court to determine all issues in dispute in the proceeding, must be included as a party to the proceeding. (example omitted)
section 92a intervention in child abuse cases (2) each of the following persons is entitled to intervene in the proceedings: ... (c) any other person responsible for the care, welfare and development of the child, ...   any other person responsible for the care, welfare and development of the child,
associate: dated: 9 february 2023
dated: 9 february 2023