last updated: 22 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
nitaya & paramat [2023] fedcfamc2f 37
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge eldershaw:
introduction
short background
15. the parties agree as follows: [the husband] do all acts and things necessary and sign all necessary documents to transfer to [the wife] at the expense of [the wife] all of his right, title and interest of the real property situated at and known as [d street, suburb e] in the state of new south wales being the whole of the land more particularly described in the certificate of title folio identifier .... that upon the transfers of the real property, [the wife] will indemnify [the husband] against all payments and liabilities including but not limited to all mortgage, rates, strata levies, taxes and outgoings of whatsoever nature and kind with respect to the real property. [the husband] acknowledges that his shares in the real property will go to [the wife’s] son, [the second respondent], as she is unable to re finance the current mortgage and also unable to pay for the mortgage on her own. [the wife] and [the second respondent] agree to allow [the husband] to remain in the real property, rent free, as long as he likes. however, he must contribute his fair share to the payment of utilities bills and foods.
documents
exhibit 1
agreed chronology and statement of agreed and disputed facts
exhibit 2
joint balance sheet (noting that the respondents’ assertion of the value of the property is its value simpliciter, without prejudice to their case that the second respondent’s share should not form part of the assets for division in these proceedings)
exhibit 3
applicant’s case outline document filed 9 december 2022
exhibit 4
respondents’ case outline document filed 16 december 2022
exhibit 5
orders and reasons for judgment of the first trial judge
exhibit 6
applicant’s tender bundle
exhibit 7
respondent’s tender bundle
exhibit 8
applicant’s written submissions
applications
b. to the payment of any outstanding mortgage c. to the payment to the applicant of 50% of the net proceeds of sale to the payment of the balance then remaining to the first respondent, or in the alternative to the first and second respondent in such proportions as they shall agree or per order of the court.
credit  separating from the husband in 2012, (b) entering the agreement with the husband, (c) the court’s direction on 22 june 2021 to file a financial statement, and (d) closing a superannuation account, even though her 20 december 2022 affidavit deposes to doing so.   entering the agreement with the husband, (c) the court’s direction on 22 june 2021 to file a financial statement, and (d) closing a superannuation account, even though her 20 december 2022 affidavit deposes to doing so.   the court’s direction on 22 june 2021 to file a financial statement, and (d) closing a superannuation account, even though her 20 december 2022 affidavit deposes to doing so.   closing a superannuation account, even though her 20 december 2022 affidavit deposes to doing so.
background .] during the periods that [the second respondent] and [mr c] lived with the respondent and myself, i was, in effect, their father. their father or fathers had no role in their life either in supporting them financially or otherwise. i would drop and pick [the second respondent] up from [k school] on numerous occasions, and i would also often drive him when he needed a lift to some social or extra­ curricular activity. on occasions, i attended events of the school such as meetings with teachers (there was a [country b] teacher at the school who interpreted for both the wife and me). when we moved to [d street, suburb e], [the second respondent] changed school to [l school], which was closer to our home. this is where [mr c] also went to school after he came to australia. the children would usually walk or catch the bus to school although from time to time i would drive them or pick them up.  e second respondent] please find a house to rent via the net and see which place you like? how much? and what are the details? this is because i am selling this house (i can't afford the loan instalments payment). work is very tiring for me, but last sunday i had a chance to go for a massage and feel a little better. having a house, but we have no money left to spend, no savings, no money to buy things, no money for massages, etc. so renting a house may save us some money for spending o.k. (as per the original)  e second respondent] – [mr c] please help think where we are going to earn money, and how? this is in order to pay for our home loans. i myself is now finding a house to rent. i will most likely be separating from your mother because our habits and ideas are moving in different directions (as per the original)
i don’t wish to sell this house. how can you sell it? renting a house is expensive and you do not get anything back in return. paying home loans, eventually, the house will belong to us. massage? why did you not ask mom to massage for you? we need to talk. you can't be angry for so long. we live in the same house, we should love each other. why did you waste money to go for a massage? (massage wasn't even good.) buying stuff? i could see you have already bought lots of things, e.g. television, stereo, a lounge cabinet. what did we buy? i earn money, but i don't spend either, except for paying bills, car instalments, insurance, petrol, tuition fees, brother's expenditure, and mom's food bills for family. i myself don't even have $100 left. i can put up with it for my future and for everyone. i, on behalf of everyone, would like to apologize if we had done anything wrong. we ask for your forgiveness. please re-consider, dad. l will be able to work soon. please be patient. (as per the original)
not selling the house, then you have to pay for the home loans by yourself. i will go and rent a place. i want to remove my name from being the house owner, but the lawyer said i couldn't do that because this house was bought under my name. and i am unable to use another person's name in replace of mine either. this is because the evidence of full-time work submitted to the bank is mine. other persons cannot sell this house, as 1 have to sign for approval before the house can be sold. i wish to live alone, or go back to [country b]. i will open a new bank account and ask the factory to transfer money into this bank account instead. i will not pay for the home loan anymore. buying a house is not an easy matter. the bank will look into evidence of stable employment records. selling a house is not easy either. do not think that i'm heartless if i wish to live in a rented place instead. (as per the original)   be taken off the home loan, to which the husband answered “yes”, (b) transfer the property to the wife and second respondent, to which he answered “yes”, and (c) transfer the home loan to the wife, to which he said he could not transfer the loan to her directly because she did not have a full time job. as i understood him, this explained why the title was transferred to the wife and the second respondent in the same transaction.   transfer the property to the wife and second respondent, to which he answered “yes”, and (c) transfer the home loan to the wife, to which he said he could not transfer the loan to her directly because she did not have a full time job. as i understood him, this explained why the title was transferred to the wife and the second respondent in the same transaction.   transfer the home loan to the wife, to which he said he could not transfer the loan to her directly because she did not have a full time job. as i understood him, this explained why the title was transferred to the wife and the second respondent in the same transaction.
as at august 2014 phasis added)
august 2014 to june 2017
the transfer was registered and given effect. the wife moved out of the property in late 2014. the husband continued to live there with [the second respondent] and [mr c] for a period but then, after certain disagreements, [the second respondent] effectively excluded the husband from the property ...
i continued to pay my share of the mortgage on a 50/50 basis with [the second respondent] up until around 2017. this was the time my youngest son, who was living in the [d street, suburb e] unit, obtained employment. as such, rather than him paying rent he paid my share of the mortgage.
...when i went to my room, i noticed that my belongings had been interfered with – they were in different places to where i had left them. i could not find my clothes, but later found a black plastic bag containing my clothing in the garage. some of my most treasured possessions, such as a statue, were not there and i have not seen again. there were a number of documents that had been in the room (including receipts for payment of utility bills) which had been removed. i was able to collect some of my personal items but a number of my personal items still remain at the [d street, suburb e] unit. i do have 2 utility bills- one being an energy australia gas account for the period 12 january 2016 and a sydney water account for the period l april 2016-30 june 2016 with receipts for payment from my bank account. copies of these were tendered as an exhibit to a previous affidavit, so disclosure of them has been made. i made these payments at the post office. there were other payments which i made for which i no longer have the documentation of the reasons set out in this paragraph.
...i became concerned that the [husband] was not of sound mind and that it was unacceptable to bring people to the property that were worrisome for my wife and [me].   the evidence about the garage door being broken appears to be a recent invention and does not explain why all locks were changed, and (b) the evidence that the husband’s collection of his belongings was a sign that he had abandoned occupation does not accord with the placement of his belongings in a black plastic bag in the garage and disappearance of treasured artefacts.   the evidence that the husband’s collection of his belongings was a sign that he had abandoned occupation does not accord with the placement of his belongings in a black plastic bag in the garage and disappearance of treasured artefacts.
since 2018   per the original)
legal framework
the judge called upon to decide proceedings of that kind is not entitled to do what has been described as 'palm tree justice'. no doubt he is given a wide discretion, but he must exercise it in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down. .] third, whether making a property settlement order is "just and equitable" is not to be answered by beginning from the assumption that one or other party has the right to have the property of the parties divided between them or has the right to an interest in marital property which is fixed by reference to the various matters (including financial and other contributions) set out in s 79(4). the power to make a property settlement order must be exercised "in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down". to conclude that making an order is "just and equitable" only because of and by reference to various matters in s 79(4), without a separate consideration of s 79(2), would be to conflate the statutory requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the act.
...if the parties’ interests in specific items of property differ or they have made differing contributions, it may be desirable to proceed upon an item by item basis in the division of property between them. in such cases, justice and equity may be best served by treating the items separately for the purpose of determining the proportions in which they are to be divided, particularly if the overall division is to be effected by the transfer or retention of interests in individual assets...   even though no party seeks a distribution of the husband’s cash and superannuation, such that those assets will remain with him, he held about 12 per cent of his current superannuation at the time of the agreement and had $4,000 in savings, i.e. about 16 per cent of the current cash holdings. it cannot be said that the husband accumulated the whole of these assets since separation such that an asset by asset approach may work an injustice against the wife, and (b) section 79(2) of the act obliges to me to consider the overall effect of the orders, which is more easily achieved via a global approach.   section 79(2) of the act obliges to me to consider the overall effect of the orders, which is more easily achieved via a global approach.
consideration
is the second respondent’s interest in the property ‘matrimonial property’? street, suburb e] was transferred by the applicant and the first respondent to the first and second respondent pursuant to the [agreement]. there is no other basis contended, or available, for the transfer of a share in [d street, suburb e] to the second respondent. the agreed chronology clearly demonstrates that the [agreement] was signed by the parties on 29 or 30 august 2022, it provided for the transfer of [d street, suburb e] by the applicant to the respondent and contained an acknowledgement that the applicant’s shares in [d street, suburb e] would go to the second respondent. this is exactly what occurred in october 2014. on 22 june 2021 the court declared that the [agreement] was non-binding. accordingly, it follows that the [agreement] is not a contract, since it is an essential element of a contract that it may be “enforced or recognised by law”.
subject to subsection (1a), a financial agreement is binding on the parties to the agreement if and only if ... (emphasis added)
it is declared that the financial agreement entered into by the applicant and the first respondent on 29-30 august 2014 is not binding within the meaning of s 90g of the family law act 1975 (cth). (emphasis added)
restitution in integrum and restitution simpliciter
an order that the second respondent shall make restitution in integrum to the first respondent and/or the applicant and shall cause the whole of his right title and interest in the [d street, suburb e] in the state of new south wales being the whole of the land more particularly described in the certificate of title folio [...49] (“[d street, suburb e]”) to be transferred to the first respondent and/or the applicant.
in the alternative, the second respondent shall pay the sum equivalent to ½ of the current equity in [d street, suburb e] (to be calculated by deducting the loan liability secured upon [d street, suburb e] from the value of [d street, suburb e]) to the first respondent and/or the applicant.
restitution is returning to the proper owner property or the monetary value of their loss. there are 3 elements of restitution namely: 1. a benefit has been received by the defendant 2. the benefit is at the expense of the plaintiff it would be unjust in the circumstances to allow the defendant to retain the benefit (see anz banking group v westpac banking corporation [1988] hca 17, 164 clr 662, 78 alr 157 at 673). a benefit “includes any increase in wealth, in the form of money, services, property (both real and personal)...” (cooley, radan and vickovich op cit paragraph 38.12) restitution clearly applies and is the most obvious remedy in the current circumstances cooley, radan and vickovich (op. cit.) summarise the position at 38.19:
“as previously noted, restitutionary remedies have been sought in many situations where it a defendant has received and accepted a benefit in circumstances where a contract is said to be unenforceable or ineffective. a contract (or transaction) may be ineffective for a variety of reasons. the basic division is between inherently ineffective contracts and those which subsequently become ineffective. the former includes transactions which are not fully effective as contracts because of a failure to pass the law’s criteria for contract formation, or a failure to satisfy the criteria applied to show that a contract is enforceable. the three main categories are: (1) contracts which fail to materialise (2) contracts which are void for mistake lack of authority, uncertainty of agreement or rendered void by statute, and (3) contracts unenforceable, either at common law or under statute.” (ialics added) [sic]
an order is being made by the court that the [agreement] is not binding pursuant to the family law act. this is the consequence that it is unenforceable under statute. it follows that the court should make an order for restitution. the most obvious and just order for restitution is an order that the second respondent transfer his interest in [d street, suburb e] to either or both of the applicant and the first respondent. alternatively, the court could make an order for payment of money by the second respondent equivalent to his gain (the equity in [d street, suburb e]).
it is now common ground between the parties that, if anz had demanded repayment of the excess of $100,000 immediately after the transfer of funds had been received and before westpac had in any way dealt with the money, westpac would have been liable to repay the $100,000 to anz on the ground that it was money paid pursuant to a fundamental mistake. that being so, the argument on both sides has proceeded on the basis that the amount of the overpayment was prima facie recoverable by anz from westpac. the result is that it is unnecessary, for the purposes of the present case, to investigate what constitutes a "fundamental mistake" for the purposes of the principle that money payable under a fundamental mistake of fact is prima facie recoverable by the payer. it can, however, be said that we can see no reason to doubt the correctness of the view expressed or implicit in the judgments in the courts below to the effect that the notion of "fundamental mistake" does not require either that the payer's mistake be shared by the payee or that the mistake be as to the existence of a fact which, if it had existed, would have resulted in the payee being under a legal obligation to make the payment. that having been said, it is preferable to leave for another day consideration of the question whether the requirement that the mistake be fundamental involves any more than that it appears that, without the mistake on the part of the payer, the payment would not have been made. (citations omitted).
anz's submission about the nature of its claim can be readily accepted. the basis of the common law action of money had and received for recovery of an amount paid under fundamental mistake of fact should now be recognized as lying not in implied contract but in restitution or unjust enrichment. in other words, receipt of a payment which has been made under a fundamental mistake is one of the categories of case in which the facts give rise to a prima facie obligation to make restitution, in the sense of compensation for the benefit of unjust enrichment, to the person who has sustained the countervailing detriment. the common law right of action may arise in circumstances which also give rise to a resulting trust of specific property or funds or which would lead a modern court to grant relief by way of constructive trust. however, notwithstanding that the grounds of the action for recovery are framed in the traditional words of trust or use and that contemporary legal principles of restitution or unjust enrichment can be equated with seminal equitable notions of good conscience, the action itself is not for the enforcement of a trust or for tracing or the recovery of specific money or property. it is a common law action for recovery of the value of the unjust enrichment and the fact that specific money or property received can no longer be identified in the hands of the recipient or traced into other specific property which he holds does not of itself constitute an answer in a category of case in which the law imposes a prima facie liability to make restitution. before that prima facie liability will be displaced, there must be circumstances (e.g. that the payment was made for good consideration such as the discharge of an existing debt or, arguably, that there has been some adverse change of position by the recipient in good faith and in reliance on the payment) which the law recognizes would make an order for restitution unjust. (citations omitted, emphasis added).
the prima facie liability to make restitution is imposed by the law on the person who has been unjustly enriched. in the ordinary case of a payment of money, that person will be the payee. however, when the person to whom the payment is directly made receives it as an intermediary (e.g. as agent for a designated principal), there may be uncertainty about the identity of the actual recipient of the benefit at the moment of payment. if the circumstances are such that the intermediary is to be seen as being himself the initial recipient of the benefit, his prima facie liability will ordinarily be displaced when he has handed the money received on to the person for whom he received it. in such a case he has, in the event, not retained "the benefit of the windfall" but been "a mere conduit-pipe" [...] it must appear that the third party has effectively received the benefit of the payment with the consequence that the prima facie liability to make restitution has become his. it will subsequently be necessary to return to this aspect of the matter and consider whether the agent must also establish that he would sustain some overall detriment by reason of the mistaken payment if he were required to repay the amount to the payer and look to his principal for indemnity.
...both authority and principle support the conclusion that an agent who has received money on his principal's behalf will, without more, have a good defence if, before learning that the money was paid under fundamental mistake, he has "paid it to the principal or done something equivalent" thereto. the rationale of such a general rule can be identified in terms of the law of agency and of notions of unjust enrichment. if money is paid to an agent on behalf of a principal and the agent receives it in his capacity as such and, without notice of any mistake or irregularity in the payment, applies the money for the purpose for which it was paid to him, he has applied it in accordance with the mandate of the payer who must look to the principal for recovery. in those circumstances, the benefit of the payment has been effectively passed on to the principal who will be prima facie liable to make restitution if the payment was made under a fundamental mistake of fact. if the matter needs to be expressed in terms of detriment or change of position, the payment by the agent to the principal of the money which he has received on the principal's behalf, of itself constitutes the relevant detriment or change of position. in that regard, no relevant distinction can be drawn between payment to the principal or payment to another or others on behalf of the principal. (citations omitted)
constructive trust
in the alternative, a declaration that the second respondent holds his interest in [d street, suburb e] on constructive trust for the first respondent and/or applicant.
the second respondent holds his interest in [d street, suburb e] on trust for the first respondent and the applicant. this must be so in circumstances where the basis for his ownership of [d street, suburb e] is vitiated by the order finding the [agreement] to be non-binding. in greater pacific investments pty ltd v australian national industries ltd (1996) 39 nswlr 143 at 153 the court said:
“...if a does effectively avoid the transaction and (if necessary) obtain an order for rescission, the parties will be treated in equity as if the transaction had never been effected, in other words equity will treat be as if he had held the property in trust for a that is, as a constructive trustee, ab initio.”
in paragon finance plc the db thackerar and co-(a firm) [1999] 1all er 400 and 408-409 millet j referred to the 2 categories of constructive trusts, the second one being:
“... those cases where the trust obligation arises as a direct consequence of the unlawful transaction which is impeached by the plaintiff. a constructive trust arises by operation of law whenever the circumstances are such that it would be unconscionable for the owner of property (usually but not necessarily the legal estate) to assert his beneficial interest in the property and deny the beneficial interest of another”. (italics added)
in general, where there is a contract for the sale of property by a to b made in breach of a fiduciary duty owed to a by b (or by c in whose breach b knowingly participated), pursuant to which the legal title to the property has been transferred from a to b, the transaction is in equity voidable at the instance of a, who may (if necessary) obtain an order for rescission setting it aside. unless and until a effectively avoids the transaction and (if necessary) obtains an order for rescission, b's property rights as a result of the transaction remain unaffected. however if a does effectively avoid the transaction and (if necessary) obtain an order for rescission, the parties will be treated in equity as if the transaction had never been effected, in other words equity will treat b as if he had held the property in trust for a, that is, as a constructive trustee, ab initio. a constructive trust arises in such circumstances as a consequence of the effective avoidance or rescission of the transaction. where, for whatever reason, the transaction has not been and cannot be effectively avoided and rescission is unavailable, it remains effective and no constructive trust can arise: see generally daly y sydney stock exchange ltd [1986] hca 25, (1986) 160 clr 371at 386-390, per brennan j. (emphasis added)
regrettably, however, the expressions ‘constructive trust’ and ‘constructive trustee’ have been used by equity lawyers to describe two entirely different situations. the first covers those cases already mentioned, where the defendant, though not expressly appointed as trustee, has assumed the duties of a trustee by a lawful transaction which was independent of and preceded the breach of trust and is not impeached by the plaintiff. the second covers those cases where the trust obligation arises as a direct consequence of the unlawful transaction which is impeached by the plaintiff. [...] the second class of case is different. it arises when the defendant is implicated in a fraud. equity has always given relief against fraud by making any person sufficiently implicated in the fraud accountable in equity. in such a case he is traditionally though i think unfortunately described as a constructive trustee and said to be ‘liable to account as constructive trustee’. such a person is not in fact a trustee at all, even though he may be liable to account as if he were. he never assumes the position of a trustee, and if he receives the trust property at all it is adversely to the plaintiff by an unlawful transaction which is impugned by the plaintiff. in such a case the expressions ‘constructive trust’ and ‘constructive trustee’ are misleading, for there is no trust and usually no possibility of a proprietary remedy, they are ‘nothing more than a formula for equitable relief ’: selangor united rubber estates ltd v cradock (no 3) [1968] 2 all er 1073 at 1097, [1968] 1 wlr 1555 at 1582 per ungoed-thomas j.
the type of equity which the plaintiff claims is well recognised. it is a form of proprietary estoppel known as estoppel by encouragement. it comes into existence when an owner of property has encouraged another to alter his or her position in the expectation of obtaining a proprietary interest and that other, in reliance on the expectation created or encouraged, has changed his or her position to their detriment. equity may compel the owner to give effect to the expectation in whole or in part: see giumelli v giumelli (1999) 196 clr 101, and more recently, delaforce v simpson-cook [2010] nswca 84, (2010) 78 nswlr 483. the plaintiff was encouraged by the first defendant to contribute to the property on the representation made by, and an expectation created by, the first defendant, that the plaintiff would be entitled to reside there. the first defendant now seeks unconscientiously to depart from the representation and to deny the plaintiff fulfilment of the expectation which she created, and upon which the plaintiff acted to her detriment. in these circumstances, the court will compel the first defendant to give effect to the expectation. a constructive trust should not be imposed if, in all the circumstances of the case, there is an appropriate equitable remedy which falls short of the imposition of a trust...
section 106b
in the alternative, pursuant to s 106b of the family law act, the transfer with dealing number ai 9997306 from the applicant and the first respondent to the first respondent at [sic] the second respondent shall be set aside.   in proceedings under this act, the court may set aside or restrain the making of an instrument or making of a disposition by or on behalf of, or by direction or in the interest of, a party, which is made or proposed to be made to defeat an existing or anticipated order in those proceedings or which, irrespective of intention, is likely to defeat any such order.  .]   the court may order that any money or real or personal property dealt with by any instrument or disposition referred to in subsection (1) [...] may be taken in execution or charged with the payment of such sums for costs or maintenance as the court directs, or that the proceeds of sale must be paid into court to abide its order. (3) the court must have regard to the interests of, and shall make any order proper for the protection of, a bona fide purchaser or other interested person. (4) a party or a person acting in collusion with a party may be ordered to pay the costs of any other party or of a bona fide purchaser or other person interested of and incidental to any such instrument or disposition and the setting aside or restraining of the instrument or disposition.
it has been found that section 106b (or its predecessor section 85) contemplates 2 possibilities-an intention to defeat an order or alternatively the likelihood of defeating an order irrespective of intention. (halabi v artillaga [1993] famca 154, (1994) flc 92-470 at 80, 884) in that case nicholson cj found that “if the necessary intention has been demonstrated there is nothing in the section which imposes the further requirement that an instrument is likely defeat such an order.” the transfer to the second respondent was done with the intention of defeating an order in that it was done in compliance with the [agreement], the intention of which was explicitly to defeat any order under the act (although the [agreement] ultimately failed to do so). see paragraph 17c of the [agreement].
unless otherwise specified in this agreement: [...] this agreement is a financial agreement for the purpose of section 90c of the family law act 1975 and shall operate in substitution for all the rights of either party to claim maintenance and or adjustive property orders under part viiia or part viiiab of the said act and the parties accept the benefits conferred upon them by this agreement in full and final discharge and satisfaction of all and any existing rights for each of them respectively and of all any rights which but for these presents might hereinafter be in each of them respectively to make any claim or demand or to bring any action or suit for or to recover or to receive any monies, damages or other property or benefits whatsoever from the other of any nature whatsoever. and the parties further agree to accept such benefits so conferred upon each of them respectively in lieu of any rights and hereinafter the parties shall restrain from seeking any order against each other in law or in equity and in the event that either party should hereinafter make or bring any claim, demand, action or suit contrary to the provisions hereof against the other then this agreement may be pleaded as an absolute bar thereto.  .] there being no prospect of reconciliation, the parties now desire to amicably settle and divide their property to avoid any expenses, delay and bitterness arising from litigation in relation to the division of their property, financial resources and maintenance under section 90e of the act.   in the case of the wife, her interest in the property remained unchanged save for the different identity of the co-owner, and (b) in the case of the husband, the transfer of his interest to the wife could scarcely be said to be a transaction to defeat his claim given he was the person who undertook the transaction and is now the person complaining about it.   in the case of the husband, the transfer of his interest to the wife could scarcely be said to be a transaction to defeat his claim given he was the person who undertook the transaction and is now the person complaining about it.
conclusion as to the second respondent’s share of the property
value of wife’s interest in the property
husband’s cash and superannuation
motor vehicles
balance sheet
owner
item
value
wife
50 per cent realisable interest in the property
$187,500
husband
cash at bank
$24,683
super fund 1
$66,859
property for division
$279,042
contributions to the property as at and since august 2014
cash and superannuation since 2014 and non-disclosure
homemaker contributions since august 2014
future needs   part f of the wife’s financial statement records that her two adult sons, with whom she lives at the property, pay the home loan, rates, water rates, groceries, energy bills and household supply costs on her behalf to the extent of $1,000 per week. the wife deposes to her intention to remain living at the property into the future, whereas (b) the husband lives at a location n. although he does not pay rent, he undertakes personal service for the premises. there is no evidence that he has any right of occupation at the premises.   the husband lives at a location n. although he does not pay rent, he undertakes personal service for the premises. there is no evidence that he has any right of occupation at the premises.
conclusion
associate: dated: 23 january 2023
dated: 23 january 2023