last updated: 24 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
cardwell & cardwell [2023] fedcfamc2f 93
orders
the court orders that:  if the matter requires urgent notice or resolution, via text message, (b) otherwise, via the divvito app or ourfamilywizard app.   otherwise, via the divvito app or ourfamilywizard app.   denigrating the other parent, or any other member of their household or family in the presence or hearing of the children, (b) communicating with the other parent in any way that is other than respectful and civil, (c) discussing these proceedings with the children or in the presence of the any of them, (d) showing the children any document(s) connected with these proceedings, and (e) physically disciplining any of the children.   communicating with the other parent in any way that is other than respectful and civil, (c) discussing these proceedings with the children or in the presence of the any of them, (d) showing the children any document(s) connected with these proceedings, and (e) physically disciplining any of the children.   discussing these proceedings with the children or in the presence of the any of them, (d) showing the children any document(s) connected with these proceedings, and (e) physically disciplining any of the children.   showing the children any document(s) connected with these proceedings, and (e) physically disciplining any of the children.   physically disciplining any of the children.   so that forthwith, the child, x cardwell, be known as, x d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as x cardwell, now be registered as x d, (b) so that forthwith, the child y cardwell, be known as y d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as y, now be registered as y d, (c) so that forthwith the child, z cardwell, be known as z d, and the mother shall and is hereby authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as z cardwell, now be registered as z d, (d) so that forthwith the child, w cardwell, be known as, w d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as w cardwell, now be registered as w d.   so that forthwith, the child y cardwell, be known as y d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as y, now be registered as y d, (c) so that forthwith the child, z cardwell, be known as z d, and the mother shall and is hereby authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as z cardwell, now be registered as z d, (d) so that forthwith the child, w cardwell, be known as, w d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as w cardwell, now be registered as w d.   so that forthwith the child, z cardwell, be known as z d, and the mother shall and is hereby authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as z cardwell, now be registered as z d, (d) so that forthwith the child, w cardwell, be known as, w d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as w cardwell, now be registered as w d.   so that forthwith the child, w cardwell, be known as, w d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as w cardwell, now be registered as w d.   x born in 2012, (b) y born in 2014, (c) z born in 2016, and (d) w born in 2019   y born in 2014, (c) z born in 2016, and (d) w born in 2019   z born in 2016, and (d) w born in 2019   w born in 2019
from the commonwealth of australia for a period of three (3) years,
and it is requested that:
reasons for judgment
myers j:  the mother have sole parental responsibility for the children w born in 2019, x born in 2012 (“x”), y born in 2014 and z born in 2016. (b) that x spend time with the father as agreed between the parties, but at the mother’s sole discretion, with the mother having taken into account x’s views.   that x spend time with the father as agreed between the parties, but at the mother’s sole discretion, with the mother having taken into account x’s views.   x, born in 2012 (b) y, born in 2014 (c) z, born in 2016 (d) w, born in 2019   y, born in 2014 (c) z, born in 2016 (d) w, born in 2019   z, born in 2016 (d) w, born in 2019   w, born in 2019
hereafter referred to as ‘the children’   for the first 8 weeks from the making of these orders, (i) in town e, from 10am until 4:00pm saturday, every 3 weeks, (b) following from the 8 weeks as set out in order 5.1, (i) in town e, from saturday 10:00am until sunday 10:00am, on the 4th weekend of every month, (ii) in sydney, from 10:00am until 4:00pm saturday, on the second weekend of every month.   in town e, from 10am until 4:00pm saturday, every 3 weeks,   following from the 8 weeks as set out in order 5.1, (i) in town e, from saturday 10:00am until sunday 10:00am, on the 4th weekend of every month, (ii) in sydney, from 10:00am until 4:00pm saturday, on the second weekend of every month.   in town e, from saturday 10:00am until sunday 10:00am, on the 4th weekend of every month, (ii) in sydney, from 10:00am until 4:00pm saturday, on the second weekend of every month.  ) in sydney, from 10:00am until 4:00pm saturday, on the second weekend of every month.   in town e, under the joint or individual supervision of ms f and mr g, at their residence. (b) in sydney, under the supervision of a registered supervisor from h services or equivalent organisation or business.   in sydney, under the supervision of a registered supervisor from h services or equivalent organisation or business.   on mother’s day, with the mother, if not otherwise in the mother’s care on that day. (b) on father’s day, with the father from 10am – 5pm, if not otherwise in the father’s care on that day. (c) x is at liberty to choose whether to spend time with the father as set out in order 7.2.   on father’s day, with the father from 10am – 5pm, if not otherwise in the father’s care on that day. (c) x is at liberty to choose whether to spend time with the father as set out in order 7.2.   x is at liberty to choose whether to spend time with the father as set out in order 7.2.   where time is in town e, at shop j, k street, suburb l. ms f or mr g are to accompany the father and the children at all changeovers. (b) where time is in sydney, at the mother’s residence or public place as agreed by the parties.   where time is in sydney, at the mother’s residence or public place as agreed by the parties.   denigrating the other parent, or speaking in a derogatory or insulting way about the other parent, or any member of the other parent’s family in the children’s hearing, (b) allowing the children to remain in the hearing of any third party who is denigrating the other parent, or speaking in a derogatory or insulting way about the other parent, or any member of the other parent’s family. (c) each parent be and is hereby restrained from discussing the issues in these proceedings and any other aspect of these proceedings with the children. (d) each parent be and is hereby restrained from showing the children any document prepared during these proceedings and is further restrained from allowing the children to view such documents. (e) that the mother and father are restrained from removing the children out of the commonwealth of australia. (f) that the mother is restrained from relocating with the children outside of sydney or town e, new south wales. (g) that each parent is retrained from denigrating or criticising the religion of the other parent. (h) that the mother cannot change the first-name or surname of any of the children without the written consent of the father.   allowing the children to remain in the hearing of any third party who is denigrating the other parent, or speaking in a derogatory or insulting way about the other parent, or any member of the other parent’s family. (c) each parent be and is hereby restrained from discussing the issues in these proceedings and any other aspect of these proceedings with the children. (d) each parent be and is hereby restrained from showing the children any document prepared during these proceedings and is further restrained from allowing the children to view such documents. (e) that the mother and father are restrained from removing the children out of the commonwealth of australia. (f) that the mother is restrained from relocating with the children outside of sydney or town e, new south wales. (g) that each parent is retrained from denigrating or criticising the religion of the other parent. (h) that the mother cannot change the first-name or surname of any of the children without the written consent of the father.   each parent be and is hereby restrained from discussing the issues in these proceedings and any other aspect of these proceedings with the children. (d) each parent be and is hereby restrained from showing the children any document prepared during these proceedings and is further restrained from allowing the children to view such documents. (e) that the mother and father are restrained from removing the children out of the commonwealth of australia. (f) that the mother is restrained from relocating with the children outside of sydney or town e, new south wales. (g) that each parent is retrained from denigrating or criticising the religion of the other parent. (h) that the mother cannot change the first-name or surname of any of the children without the written consent of the father.   each parent be and is hereby restrained from showing the children any document prepared during these proceedings and is further restrained from allowing the children to view such documents. (e) that the mother and father are restrained from removing the children out of the commonwealth of australia. (f) that the mother is restrained from relocating with the children outside of sydney or town e, new south wales. (g) that each parent is retrained from denigrating or criticising the religion of the other parent. (h) that the mother cannot change the first-name or surname of any of the children without the written consent of the father.   that the mother and father are restrained from removing the children out of the commonwealth of australia. (f) that the mother is restrained from relocating with the children outside of sydney or town e, new south wales. (g) that each parent is retrained from denigrating or criticising the religion of the other parent. (h) that the mother cannot change the first-name or surname of any of the children without the written consent of the father.   that the mother is restrained from relocating with the children outside of sydney or town e, new south wales. (g) that each parent is retrained from denigrating or criticising the religion of the other parent. (h) that the mother cannot change the first-name or surname of any of the children without the written consent of the father.   that each parent is retrained from denigrating or criticising the religion of the other parent. (h) that the mother cannot change the first-name or surname of any of the children without the written consent of the father.   that the mother cannot change the first-name or surname of any of the children without the written consent of the father.
orders made on 30 august 2022 by consent:   x born in 2012, (b) y born in 2014, (c) z born in 2016, and (d) w born in 2019.   y born in 2014, (c) z born in 2016, and (d) w born in 2019.   z born in 2016, and (d) w born in 2019.   w born in 2019.
hereinafter collectively referred to as “the children”.
minute of orders sought   once on or around the first weekend in march, (b) once on or around the first weekend in june, (c) once on or around the first weekend in september, (d) once on or around the first weekend in december.   once on or around the first weekend in june, (c) once on or around the first weekend in september, (d) once on or around the first weekend in december.   once on or around the first weekend in september, (d) once on or around the first weekend in december.   once on or around the first weekend in december.   the father shall ensure at all times: (i) that the contents of his communications with the children and gifts for the children are age appropriate, (ii) the father shall not refer in such communications to the children’s mother or any member of the maternal family, and (iii) the father shall not make any comment which refers to the previous or existing living arrangements for the children or any proposed change to those arrangements.   that the contents of his communications with the children and gifts for the children are age appropriate, (ii) the father shall not refer in such communications to the children’s mother or any member of the maternal family, and (iii) the father shall not make any comment which refers to the previous or existing living arrangements for the children or any proposed change to those arrangements.  ) the father shall not refer in such communications to the children’s mother or any member of the maternal family, and (iii) the father shall not make any comment which refers to the previous or existing living arrangements for the children or any proposed change to those arrangements.  i) the father shall not make any comment which refers to the previous or existing living arrangements for the children or any proposed change to those arrangements.   forward to the father within 7 days of the date of these orders, a postal address or post office box to which the father may address the letters, card, gifts for the children and shall inform the father in a timely manner of any change to such address, and (b) ensure that the postal address location or post office box location is checked at appropriate intervals to ensure that any communication addressed to the children is received in a timely manner by the children.   ensure that the postal address location or post office box location is checked at appropriate intervals to ensure that any communication addressed to the children is received in a timely manner by the children.   so that forthwith, the child, x, be known as, x d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as x, now to be registered as x d, (b) so that forthwith, the child y, be known as y d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as y, now be registered as y d, (c) so that forthwith the child, z, be known as z d, and the mother shall and is hereby authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as z, now be registered as z d, (d) so that forthwith the child, w, be known as, w d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as w, now be registered as w d.   so that forthwith, the child y, be known as y d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as y, now be registered as y d, (c) so that forthwith the child, z, be known as z d, and the mother shall and is hereby authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as z, now be registered as z d, (d) so that forthwith the child, w, be known as, w d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as w, now be registered as w d.   so that forthwith the child, z, be known as z d, and the mother shall and is hereby authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as z, now be registered as z d, (d) so that forthwith the child, w, be known as, w d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as w, now be registered as w d.   so that forthwith the child, w, be known as, w d, and the mother shall and is authorised to apply to the registrar of births, deaths and marriages, in new south wales, that the child known as w, now be registered as w d.   from the first saturday in the month following the date of these orders, every first saturday in the month from 10:00am to 12:00 noon for a period of two months, supervised by n contact centre or, in the event that n contact centre is not available, such other professional supervision as is nominated by the father, (b) from the conclusion of the time in order 3(a), every first saturday in the month from 10:00am to 4:00pm for a period of a further four months, supervised by n contact centre or, in the event that n contact centre is not available, such other professional supervision as is nominated by the father (noting that the first saturday of each month would include the saturday of the father’s day weekend), (c) from the conclusion of the time in order 3(b), every first saturday in the month from 10:00am to 4:00pm until a period of two years has elapsed from the date of these orders, supervised by n contact centre or, in the event that n contact centre is not available, such other professional supervision as is nominated by the father, (d) from the conclusion of the time in order 3(c), every first saturday in the month from 10:00am to 4:00pm unsupervised but subject to a support service such as the vulnerable children’s program provided through h services or such other professional support service as is recommended by that program or any ndis provider giving services to the father.   from the conclusion of the time in order 3(a), every first saturday in the month from 10:00am to 4:00pm for a period of a further four months, supervised by n contact centre or, in the event that n contact centre is not available, such other professional supervision as is nominated by the father (noting that the first saturday of each month would include the saturday of the father’s day weekend), (c) from the conclusion of the time in order 3(b), every first saturday in the month from 10:00am to 4:00pm until a period of two years has elapsed from the date of these orders, supervised by n contact centre or, in the event that n contact centre is not available, such other professional supervision as is nominated by the father, (d) from the conclusion of the time in order 3(c), every first saturday in the month from 10:00am to 4:00pm unsupervised but subject to a support service such as the vulnerable children’s program provided through h services or such other professional support service as is recommended by that program or any ndis provider giving services to the father.   from the conclusion of the time in order 3(b), every first saturday in the month from 10:00am to 4:00pm until a period of two years has elapsed from the date of these orders, supervised by n contact centre or, in the event that n contact centre is not available, such other professional supervision as is nominated by the father, (d) from the conclusion of the time in order 3(c), every first saturday in the month from 10:00am to 4:00pm unsupervised but subject to a support service such as the vulnerable children’s program provided through h services or such other professional support service as is recommended by that program or any ndis provider giving services to the father.   from the conclusion of the time in order 3(c), every first saturday in the month from 10:00am to 4:00pm unsupervised but subject to a support service such as the vulnerable children’s program provided through h services or such other professional support service as is recommended by that program or any ndis provider giving services to the father.   denigrating the other parent, or any other member of their household or family in the presence or hearing of the children, (b) communicating with the other parent in any way that is other than respectful and civil, (c) discussing these proceedings with the children or in the presence of the any of them, (d) showing the children any document(s) connected with these proceedings, (e) physically disciplining any of the children.   communicating with the other parent in any way that is other than respectful and civil, (c) discussing these proceedings with the children or in the presence of the any of them, (d) showing the children any document(s) connected with these proceedings, (e) physically disciplining any of the children.   discussing these proceedings with the children or in the presence of the any of them, (d) showing the children any document(s) connected with these proceedings, (e) physically disciplining any of the children.   showing the children any document(s) connected with these proceedings, (e) physically disciplining any of the children.
the father’s mental health:  all skill areas: extremely low range. (b) communication, functional academics and self direction: extremely low range. (c) leisure and social: low range. (d) community use, home living, health and safety, self-care and work: extremely low range.   communication, functional academics and self direction: extremely low range. (c) leisure and social: low range. (d) community use, home living, health and safety, self-care and work: extremely low range.   leisure and social: low range. (d) community use, home living, health and safety, self-care and work: extremely low range.   community use, home living, health and safety, self-care and work: extremely low range.
mr kelly: okay. now, you realise that the mother in this case has to accept what you’re telling the court now, because you haven’t brought anyone to give an updated opinion to tell the court what your current mental health status is? father: i understand that.
in discussing this matter with [mr cardwell] today, i found out that you asked him certain questions, and when he couldn’t think of the proper answer he would offer you the closest answer to the truth he could think of at the time. i’m not suggesting that he lies, definitely not, but he forgets and must improvise....for example, he has never told you that he frequently has suicidal ideation. he’d been having these thoughts since he was about sixteen years of age, when he moved from [country aj] to [country o].
mr kelly: so is it – you hear voices within your head, don’t you? father: no, that’s not voices. mr kelly: what is it? father: those are ticks. mr kelly: sorry? father: those are ticks, as – i’m his honour: so do you have ticks? is that what you’re saying? father: that’s right. mr kelly: and you have ticks? father: it’s a - - -. mr kelly: that make you say things? father: it’s a nervous tick that’s – that’s happening at that point in time. mr kelly: is it in relation to thoughts telling you to do things? father: no. mr kelly: okay. and so you say you only say them around close family and friends? father: close people that i’m comfortable with or whether or not i’m alone, yes. mr kelly: now, [dr ah] reported to [dr ab] in that same letter of 27 september 2017 – he says this: “lately, he informs me his thoughts have become hypercritical of himself, particularly of the considering number of errors or failures he perceives he’s made so far in his life.” so you do have thoughts that intrude on your mind if that’s the word. correct me if i’m wrong. you have thoughts that come into your head about – and that are critical of yourself? father: it was in relation to the – to the subject of that time. mr kelly: well, it goes on – this letter goes on to say this: at home with [ms cardwell] and with other people he knows, he often shouts out something like, “stop,” or, “shut up,” to stop the inner criticisms. so that’s what – did you tell [dr ah] that’s why you shouted out, “stop,” and, “shut up”? father: yes. mr kelly: so it’s not a tick like you just said to his honour?--- father: it – it is a tick. but it’s a tick---it’s a - - - mr kelly: in response to thoughts in your head? father: it’s a tick to stress and anxiety because that’s where the critical thoughts are coming from. mr kelly: and when did you last call out, “stop,” or, “shut up”?--- father: i – i would probably say once in the last two months. mr kelly: all right. now, this letter goes on and says: “this isn’t too troublesome at home, but recently while in line at [store ak] to pay a bill, critical thoughts assaulted him, and he shouted out, “shut up,” and the cashier was affronted and thought he was addressing her.” do you remember that happening? father: ---i – i recall that there was a situation with me and a cashier, yes.
mr kelly: do you remember telling [nurse al] that you – every – around every four weeks, you became elevated and emptied their bank account, splashing out on things or ideas you believe – he believes may change his and the family’s lives? remember telling [nurse al] that? father: i can recall something to that regard. (transcript 30 august 2022 p.46)
the father’s family violence:
mr kelly: so do you remember telling [nurse al] that you had been going to drive your car into a brick wall in an attempt to kill yourself? father: that was the initial bit. that was the initial bit of when i was - - - mr kelly: and you became frustrated when you found out you wouldn’t have enough of your dexamphetamine to see you through to your next appointment at the [ac] hospital? father: that was a – that was a frustration. (transcript, 30 august 2022 p.46)
mr kelly: ...... but what the mother says is that – and this is me summarising it. she was in the car with you, and you were saying that you felt like crashing the car and killing yourself. did you say that to her? father: yes, i did. mr kelly: and you had the children in the car at the time, didn’t you? father: i – i did. (transcript 30 august 2022 p.43)
the mother’s capacity to cope:
mr kelly: so once again, we’re back to the mother, [ms cardwell], three young children, a husband who’s telling her he’s going to drive a car into a brick wall and kill himself, empties the bank account every four weeks, and you’re both on centrelink benefits. that’s a pretty grim situation for the mother. do you agree with that? father: i – i can understand how that can be difficult, yes. (transcript, 30 august 2022 p.46)   the evidence from the supervision reports that the children, when they settled into time with the father, appeared to be comfortable with him, and (b) the mother’s view that the children were behaving well with him as a protective measure to shield them from the father.   the mother’s view that the children were behaving well with him as a protective measure to shield them from the father.
ms m’s response to that question was:
“i would fall on the side of the children being comfortable”.
associate: dated: 10 march 2023
dated: 10 march 2023