last updated: 29 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
valotis & simas [2023] fedcfamc2f 112
orders
the court orders that:  an amended application or response as appropriate, setting out the precise orders sought, if the most recently filed application or response is not current, (b) an undertaking as to disclosure in accordance with rule 6.02 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth), and (c) a certificate of readiness in the approved form.   an undertaking as to disclosure in accordance with rule 6.02 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth), and (c) a certificate of readiness in the approved form.   a certificate of readiness in the approved form.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland
legal principles with respect to summary dismissal
the approach to be taken by the court to the commonwealth's application for summary relief is not in doubt: it is a serious matter to deprive a person of access to the courts of law for it is there that the rule of law is upheld, including against government and other powerful interests. this is why relief, whether under o 26 r 18 or in the inherent jurisdiction of the court, is rarely and sparingly provided, to secure such relief, the party seeking it must show that it is clear, on the face of the opponent's documents, that the opponent lacks a reasonable cause of action or is advancing a claim that is clearly frivolous or vexatious, an opinion of the court that a case appears weak and such that it is unlikely to succeed is not, alone, sufficient to warrant summary termination. even a weak case is entitled to the time of a court. experience teaches that the concentration of attention, elaborated evidence and argument and extended time for reflection will sometimes turn an apparently unpromising cause into a successful judgment, summary relief of the kind provided for by o 26 r 18, for absence of a reasonable cause of action, is not a substitute for proceeding by way of demurrer. if there is a serious legal question to be determined, it should ordinarily be determined at a trial for the proof of facts may sometimes assist the judicial mind to understand and apply the law that is invoked and to do so in circumstances more conducive to deciding a real case involving actual litigants rather than one determined on imagined or assumed facts, if, notwithstanding the defects of pleadings, it appears that a party may have a reasonable cause of action which it has failed to put in proper form, a court will ordinarily allow that party to reframe its pleading. a question has arisen as to whether o 26 r 18 applies to part only of a pleading. however, it is unnecessary in this case to consider that question because the commonwealth's attack was upon the entirety of mr lindon’s statement of claim, and the guiding principle is, as stated in o 26 r 18(2), doing what is just. if it is clear that proceedings within the concept of the pleading under scrutiny are doomed to fail, the court should dismiss the action to protect the defendant from being further troubled, to save the plaintiff from further costs and disappointment and to relieve the court of the burden of further wasted time which could be devoted to the determination of claims which have legal merit.
42. the act makes parents endeavour to resolve parenting issues themselves. to do this they must generally undertake some alternative form of dispute resolution before commencing court proceedings. when parenting orders are made, parents can usually make changes to those orders by agreement. 43. the presumption of shared parental responsibility only applies to parents. in souter & meagher & anor [2007] famca 18, cronin j said (emphasis added):
132. whether it was a legislative oversight or not, it is curious that the provision is limited to parents. this is particularly so in a case where a child such as r has been effectively parented by his great grandparents for the major portion of his life. it is quite clear in the additional considerations in s 60cc(3)(b), (d) and (f) that persons other than parents and in particular grandparents are treated as significant participants. however, the presumption in relation to the question of sharing parental responsibility is limited to the parents. that does not mean that a court cannot make an order for a relative to have parental responsibility (see s 64b(2)(c)). counsel for the independent children’s lawyer pointed to the fact that the principle objects of part vii refer to parents and that it was the intention of the legislature to place the onus on parents to undertake those responsibilities primarily. i agree with that proposition.
24. the magistrate said the objects and principles found within s 60b of the act had been taken into account and, further, the paramountcy principle (ss 60ca, 65aa) was applied. it was not contended in the appeal the magistrate had not done as he said. however, the magistrate also said the primary and additional considerations under s 60cc of the act had been taken into account, but then curiously said those factors had “little or no relevance”. while not all factors prescribed by s 60cc of the act are relevant in every case, it is mandatory to consider those which are relevant to the case at hand.
the parties’ cases
the maternal grandmother and mother’s relationship prior to x’s birth
x’s birth and the grandmother spending time with x
commencement of legal proceedings
it is really simple. you can put the baby in the current visit us and set a firm date within the next two weeks to family therapy, or you can spend the next few years of your lives fighting us in court and you are not her “legal guardians" your her parents and should do the right thing by [x].
conclusion
associate: dated: 9 february 2023
dated: 9 february 2023
[1] see for example, aldridge & keating (2009) flc 93 – 142 and valentine & lacerra & anor [2013] famcafc53[2] see sps v pl [2008] famcafc 16