last updated: 18 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
company b & saddler [2023] fedcfamc2f 114
orders
the court orders that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
chief judge alstergren
background  the role of family report writers, (b) the current regulatory scheme for the oversight of family report writers, (c) interviews with commentators concerning the current framework for expert reports in family law matters, (d) discussion of de-identified cases in which either the respondents provided reports, including criticism of their adopted methodologies, and (e) anonymised interviews.[1]   the current regulatory scheme for the oversight of family report writers, (c) interviews with commentators concerning the current framework for expert reports in family law matters, (d) discussion of de-identified cases in which either the respondents provided reports, including criticism of their adopted methodologies, and (e) anonymised interviews.[1]   interviews with commentators concerning the current framework for expert reports in family law matters, (d) discussion of de-identified cases in which either the respondents provided reports, including criticism of their adopted methodologies, and (e) anonymised interviews.[1]   discussion of de-identified cases in which either the respondents provided reports, including criticism of their adopted methodologies, and (e) anonymised interviews.[1]   anonymised interviews.[1]
section 121
restriction on publication of court proceedings (1) a person who publishes in a newspaper or periodical publication, by radio broadcast or television or by other electronic means, or otherwise disseminates to the public or to a section of the public by any means, any account of any proceedings, or of any part of any proceedings, under this act that identifies:   a party to the proceedings, (b) a person who is related to, or associated with, a party to the proceedings or is, or is alleged to be, in any other way concerned in the matter to which the proceedings relate, or (c) a witness in the proceedings,   a person who is related to, or associated with, a party to the proceedings or is, or is alleged to be, in any other way concerned in the matter to which the proceedings relate, or
commits an offence punishable, upon conviction by imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year.  phasis added)   the preceding provisions of this section do not apply to or in relation to: (d) the publishing of a notice or report in pursuance of the direction of a court, or   the publishing of a notice or report in pursuance of the direction of a court, or
... (g) publication of accounts of proceedings, where those accounts have been approved by the court.   publication of accounts of proceedings, where those accounts have been approved by the court.
section 243 [of the family court act 1997 (wa)] is an exception to the principle of open justice. it is a restriction imposed by parliament and not by the family court. the underlying policy is to ensure that people do not feel discouraged from coming to the court for fear of having their private life made public. the law is also designed to ensure that children are not held up to ridicule, curiosity or notoriety...
...[a] statute which affects the open-court principle, even on a discretionary basis, should generally be construed, where constructional choices are open, so as to minimise its intrusion upon that principle...
summary dismissal  a party may apply for summary orders after a response has been filed if the party claims, in relation to the application or response, that:   the court has no jurisdiction, or (b) the other party has no legal capacity to apply for the orders sought, or (c) it is frivolous, vexatious or an abuse of process, or (d) there is no reasonable likelihood of success.
is there a ‘matter’?
does the court have subject matter jurisdiction?
does section 121(9) of the act confer jurisdiction?
a reference in the statute to a claim being brought in “any court of competent jurisdiction” is premised on “the jurisdiction of the court - its authority to decide - being found in another source”. a powerful indication that it does not is the existence of an express provision elsewhere in the act dealing with jurisdiction, but the absence of express provision does not mean that there is an implied conferral of jurisdiction. [8] (citations omitted).
"court" includes: (a) an officer of a court investigating or dealing with a matter in accordance with this act, the regulations or the rules of court, and (b) a tribunal established by or under a law of the commonwealth, of a state or of a territory.   an officer of a court investigating or dealing with a matter in accordance with this act, the regulations or the rules of court, and (b) a tribunal established by or under a law of the commonwealth, of a state or of a territory.   a tribunal established by or under a law of the commonwealth, of a state or of a territory.
section 121(9)(g) of the act
section 121(9)(d) of the act
we have difficulty understanding how the order made in this case would come within any of those three mentioned categories. the purported order did no more than give leave. it did not constitute a direction for the publication of a notice or report for the purposes of paragraph (d) and it did not contain an approved account of the purpose of paragraph (g) ...
justiciable controversy
a “matter”, as a justiciable controversy, is not co-extensive with a legal proceeding, but rather means the subject matter for determination in a legal proceeding– “controversies which might come before a court of justice” (emphasis added). it is identifiable independently of proceedings brought for its determination and encompasses all claims made within the scope of the controversy. what comprises a “single justiciable controversy” must be capable of identification, but it is not capable of exhaustive definition. “what is and what is not part of the one controversy depends on what the parties have done, the relationships between or among them and the laws which attach rights or liabilities to their conduct and relationships”. the requirement that, for there to be a “matter”, there must be an “immediate right, duty or liability to be established by the determination of the court” reinforces that the controversy that the court is being asked to determine is genuine, and not an advisory opinion divorced from a controversy, and, further, that only a claim is necessary. a matter can exist even though a right, duty or liability has not been, and may never be, established.  tations omitted)
...the central conception of a matter is of a justiciable controversy between defined persons or classes of persons about an existing legal right or legal obligation. the controversy is justiciable if it is capable of being resolved in the exercise of judicial power by an order of a court which, if made, would operate to put an end to the question in controversy ...   whether the dispute is of ‘real practical importance’ to the applicant, (b) whether the applicant has a ‘real commercial interest’ in the relief sought, (c) whether the respondent was a ‘proper contradictor’, and (d) whether there is a ‘real controversy’.[14]   whether the applicant has a ‘real commercial interest’ in the relief sought, (c) whether the respondent was a ‘proper contradictor’, and (d) whether there is a ‘real controversy’.[14]   whether the respondent was a ‘proper contradictor’, and (d) whether there is a ‘real controversy’.[14]   whether there is a ‘real controversy’.[14]
costs
conclusion
associate: dated: 10 february 2023
dated: 10 february 2023
[1] affidavit of ms c filed 8 july 2022 and 31 august 2022.[2] re w (public application) (1997) flc 92-756 at 215 (fogarty and baker jj).[3] attorney-general v observer limited [1990] 1 ac 109 at 183 (sir john donaldson m.r).[4] stativa & stativa [2015] famcafc 170; pelerman v pelerman [2000] famca 881; (2000) flc 93-037.[5] hobart international airport at [26] (kiefel cj, keane and gordon jj).[6] hazeldell ltd v commonwealth [1924] hca 36; (1924) 34 clr 442 (isaacs acj); old ugc inc v industrial relations commission of new south wales [2006] hca 24; (2006) 225 clr 274 at [51] (kirby j).[7] leeming, mark, authority to decide – the law of jurisdiction in australia (the federation press, 2nd edition, 2020) (“authority to decide”) at 133.[8] authority to decide at 133-4.[9] authority to decide at 133-4.[10] applicant’s written submissions filed 30 september 2022 at [58].[11] transcript 11 november 2022, p.31 lines 32-36.[12] affidavit of ms c filed 31 august 2022.[13] hobart international airport at 223 [29].[14] hobart international airport at [36].[15] affidavit of ms c dated 8 july 2022 at [8].[16] commissioner of taxation v darling [2014] famcafc 59; (2014) 285 flr 428 (thackray, strickland and murphy jj) at [203].