last updated: 24 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
torney & gong [2023] fedcfamc2f 238
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  provide the mother with no less than fourteen (14) days’ notice in writing of any such proposed decision, and (b) consider any written response by the mother before making the decision, (c) provide the mother with written confirmation of the decision he has made, within fourteen (14) days of making the decision.   consider any written response by the mother before making the decision, (c) provide the mother with written confirmation of the decision he has made, within fourteen (14) days of making the decision.   provide the mother with written confirmation of the decision he has made, within fourteen (14) days of making the decision.   during school terms, commencing on the first thursday after the making of these orders and continuing each alternate thursday thereafter, from 3pm or after school thursday until 9am or the commencement of school the immediately following monday. (b) during all school holiday periods up to the conclusion of the christmas school holidays in 2025/2026 (when the child is 13 years old): (i) the pattern of time the child spends with the mother in accordance with order 5a) herein shall continue throughout the holiday period with such time to be extended by one additional night so that the time concludes at 6pm on the tuesday and is a total of 5 nights in duration, (c) commencing from the end of the term 1 school holidays in 2026 onwards and continuing in school holidays thereafter: (i) during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods in even years, the child spend time with the mother from after school friday to 5pm on the middle saturday, (ii) during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods in odd years, the child spend time with the mother from 5pm on the middle saturday until commencement of school on the monday, (iii) during the end of term 4 school holidays in even years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the first saturday until 12 noon saturday three (3) weeks later, (iv) during the end of term 4 school holidays in odd years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the fourth saturday until recommencement of school on the monday.   during all school holiday periods up to the conclusion of the christmas school holidays in 2025/2026 (when the child is 13 years old): (i) the pattern of time the child spends with the mother in accordance with order 5a) herein shall continue throughout the holiday period with such time to be extended by one additional night so that the time concludes at 6pm on the tuesday and is a total of 5 nights in duration, (c) commencing from the end of the term 1 school holidays in 2026 onwards and continuing in school holidays thereafter: (i) during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods in even years, the child spend time with the mother from after school friday to 5pm on the middle saturday, (ii) during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods in odd years, the child spend time with the mother from 5pm on the middle saturday until commencement of school on the monday, (iii) during the end of term 4 school holidays in even years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the first saturday until 12 noon saturday three (3) weeks later, (iv) during the end of term 4 school holidays in odd years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the fourth saturday until recommencement of school on the monday.   the pattern of time the child spends with the mother in accordance with order 5a) herein shall continue throughout the holiday period with such time to be extended by one additional night so that the time concludes at 6pm on the tuesday and is a total of 5 nights in duration,   commencing from the end of the term 1 school holidays in 2026 onwards and continuing in school holidays thereafter: (i) during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods in even years, the child spend time with the mother from after school friday to 5pm on the middle saturday, (ii) during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods in odd years, the child spend time with the mother from 5pm on the middle saturday until commencement of school on the monday, (iii) during the end of term 4 school holidays in even years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the first saturday until 12 noon saturday three (3) weeks later, (iv) during the end of term 4 school holidays in odd years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the fourth saturday until recommencement of school on the monday.   during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods in even years, the child spend time with the mother from after school friday to 5pm on the middle saturday, (ii) during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods in odd years, the child spend time with the mother from 5pm on the middle saturday until commencement of school on the monday, (iii) during the end of term 4 school holidays in even years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the first saturday until 12 noon saturday three (3) weeks later, (iv) during the end of term 4 school holidays in odd years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the fourth saturday until recommencement of school on the monday.  ) during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods in odd years, the child spend time with the mother from 5pm on the middle saturday until commencement of school on the monday, (iii) during the end of term 4 school holidays in even years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the first saturday until 12 noon saturday three (3) weeks later, (iv) during the end of term 4 school holidays in odd years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the fourth saturday until recommencement of school on the monday.  i) during the end of term 4 school holidays in even years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the first saturday until 12 noon saturday three (3) weeks later, (iv) during the end of term 4 school holidays in odd years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the fourth saturday until recommencement of school on the monday.  ) during the end of term 4 school holidays in odd years, the child spend time with the mother from 12 noon on the fourth saturday until recommencement of school on the monday.   at christmas: (i) in odd numbered years: from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day with the father, and from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day with the mother. (ii) in even numbered years: from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day with the mother, and from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day with the father. (b) at easter: (i) in odd numbered years: from 3pm on the thursday prior to easter until 3pm easter saturday with the father, and from 3pm easter saturday until 3pm easter monday with the mother. (ii) in even numbered years: from 3pm on the thursday prior to easter until 3pm easter saturday with the mother, and from 3pm easter saturday until 3pm easter monday with the father. (c) on mother’s day with the mother from 9am to 5pm. (d) on father’s day with the father from 9am to 5pm.   in odd numbered years: from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day with the father, and from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day with the mother. (ii) in even numbered years: from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day with the mother, and from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day with the father.  ) in even numbered years: from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day with the mother, and from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day with the father.   at easter: (i) in odd numbered years: from 3pm on the thursday prior to easter until 3pm easter saturday with the father, and from 3pm easter saturday until 3pm easter monday with the mother. (ii) in even numbered years: from 3pm on the thursday prior to easter until 3pm easter saturday with the mother, and from 3pm easter saturday until 3pm easter monday with the father. (c) on mother’s day with the mother from 9am to 5pm. (d) on father’s day with the father from 9am to 5pm.   in odd numbered years: from 3pm on the thursday prior to easter until 3pm easter saturday with the father, and from 3pm easter saturday until 3pm easter monday with the mother. (ii) in even numbered years: from 3pm on the thursday prior to easter until 3pm easter saturday with the mother, and from 3pm easter saturday until 3pm easter monday with the father.  ) in even numbered years: from 3pm on the thursday prior to easter until 3pm easter saturday with the mother, and from 3pm easter saturday until 3pm easter monday with the father.   on mother’s day with the mother from 9am to 5pm. (d) on father’s day with the father from 9am to 5pm.   on father’s day with the father from 9am to 5pm.
passports and overseas travel  the time and date of departure from australia and time and date of return to australia, and (b) the address and contact details of where the child will be staying throughout the trip including the names of hotel and other accommodation, and (c) a copy of the flight or other transport details and any available itinerary, and   the address and contact details of where the child will be staying throughout the trip including the names of hotel and other accommodation, and (c) a copy of the flight or other transport details and any available itinerary, and   a copy of the flight or other transport details and any available itinerary, and
noting that in relation to orders 8 to 10 the parents may agree in writing to different timeframes in relation to passport and travel arrangements in the future.
miscellaneous  administering physical discipline to the child or permitting any other person to do so, (b) exposing the child to any kind of family violence. (c) discussing in the hearing or presence of the child details of the court proceedings. (d) asking the child questions about the other party’s life or household.   exposing the child to any kind of family violence. (c) discussing in the hearing or presence of the child details of the court proceedings. (d) asking the child questions about the other party’s life or household.   discussing in the hearing or presence of the child details of the court proceedings. (d) asking the child questions about the other party’s life or household.   asking the child questions about the other party’s life or household.
reasons for judgment
judge betts
introduction & overview
the hearing before me
...evidencing that the father had completed six (6) months of therapy regarding the father and the child’s psychological needs.
the real issues in this case
the law
section 60cc how a court determines what is in a child’s best interests primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views,   the nature of the relationship of the child with:  each of the child’s parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the capacity of:  each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),
to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant,   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,   any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
issues & concerns about the mother as primary carer
...shouting while arguing with a spouse and occasionally pushing and shoving each other during an argument is accepted and common behaviour and culturally accepted in china.
...there had been another incident between herself and [mr d] where he had attempted to leave the house for school against her wishes, and she had grabbed his backpack to prevent him from leaving. she reported that [mr torney] had rung the police to report that she had assaulted [mr d].  r torney” being a reference to the father as distinct from “young x”]
she reported that she now had another court case to attend regarding this assault on 20 july. i agreed to write her a support letter for this court case. [ms gong] reported that her relationship with [mr d] had greatly improved and that they were now negotiating and compromising more together.   she was asked whether she was still living at v street, town f, being the former matrimonial home. it was suggested that mr d was in fact living there on his own.
the mother’s response was that she was still living there. by implication, mr d was not being left unsupervised, and the mother asserted that young x shared a bedroom with her at town f.   the next question or issue raised was whether the mother was staying at a share house with her son mr c at an undisclosed address and who might be living there. it was suggested that young x said he had been sleeping on a mattress in the lounge room.
the mother’s response was that she was staying with mr c in a seven (7) bedroom house and that young x slept in the same bedroom as the mother. however, in cross-examination, the mother then said that she was living at this particular property (at suburb w) during the week, and that sometimes on weekends she would be back at town f. that is to say, there was no real routine as to where she was staying.   when asked the address of this suburb w property, the mother could not give it and said she relied on a gps, although she did offer to get the address off her phone. that offer was never taken up by the father’s counsel, nor was it the subject of any re-examination by the mother’s counsel. the mother said that the suburb w property was a four (4) bedroom home at one stage, and at another point she seemed to suggest it was a five (5) bedroom home. it was unclear who was living there. at one point, the mother said that mr c and his girlfriend, his friend and girlfriend, and the mother and mr d were there, so that there were six (6) people in total in the home, together with young x on occasions when he visited.
issues & concerns about the father as primary carer
she just throws out the chinese card, you know, “me no speak english”.
when speaking of his relationship with [x], the father became quite emotional and intense and stated, “my son is my whole life. i never want to be separated from him”.
best interests
“don’t fight. it’s not nice to be fought over. and, dad, you have to share me a little bit more”.
regarding the future, [x] said he would like things to continue much as they are. he said he would not be keen to live with his mother full time, but is happy to see her every second weekend. he told me his preference is to continue to live mostly with his father and see his mother as described. when i asked [x] about school holidays, he told me decisively that he’d prefer the alternate weekend contact to continue during the holidays, rather than spend a block of time with his mother. [x] said he doesn’t feel unsafe at any time with his mother, and, as mentioned earlier, he doesn’t feel unsafe with his elder half-brother, [mr c].
weighing up the competing parenting proposals & potential changes to young x’s circumstances
conclusion
associate: dated: 10 february 2023
dated: 10 february 2023