last updated: 24 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
nassar & tarvin (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 247
orders
the court orders by consent that:  commencing wednesday, 15 february 2023 and each alternate week thereafter, with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) until the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) the following wednesday, (b) commencing 22 february 2023 and each alternate week thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) until the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) the following wednesday, and (c) with such cycle to continue after each school holiday period as if the holiday period had not occurred.   commencing 22 february 2023 and each alternate week thereafter, with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) until the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) the following wednesday, and (c) with such cycle to continue after each school holiday period as if the holiday period had not occurred.   with such cycle to continue after each school holiday period as if the holiday period had not occurred.
x's birthday  from the conclusion of school until 7:00pm if a school day, or (b) from 10:00am to 3:00pm if a non-school day.   from 10:00am to 3:00pm if a non-school day.
term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays  in even numbered years: - (i) in the first week, with the mother from the conclusion of school on the last day of term (or 3:30pm) until 3:30pm on the saturday in the second week (being the second saturday of school holidays), and (ii) in the second week, with the father from 3:30pm on the saturday (being the second saturday of the school holidays) until the commencement of school in the new school term. (b) in odd numbered years: - (i) in the first week with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of term (or 3:30pm) until 3:30pm on the saturday in the second week (being the second saturday of school holidays), and (ii) in the second week, with the mother from 3:30pm on the saturday (being the second saturday of the school holidays) until the commencement of school in the new school term.   in the first week, with the mother from the conclusion of school on the last day of term (or 3:30pm) until 3:30pm on the saturday in the second week (being the second saturday of school holidays), and (ii) in the second week, with the father from 3:30pm on the saturday (being the second saturday of the school holidays) until the commencement of school in the new school term.  ) in the second week, with the father from 3:30pm on the saturday (being the second saturday of the school holidays) until the commencement of school in the new school term.   in odd numbered years: - (i) in the first week with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of term (or 3:30pm) until 3:30pm on the saturday in the second week (being the second saturday of school holidays), and (ii) in the second week, with the mother from 3:30pm on the saturday (being the second saturday of the school holidays) until the commencement of school in the new school term.   in the first week with the father from the conclusion of school on the last day of term (or 3:30pm) until 3:30pm on the saturday in the second week (being the second saturday of school holidays), and (ii) in the second week, with the mother from 3:30pm on the saturday (being the second saturday of the school holidays) until the commencement of school in the new school term.  ) in the second week, with the mother from 3:30pm on the saturday (being the second saturday of the school holidays) until the commencement of school in the new school term.
and that the parties' usual times as set out in paragraph 2 of these orders be suspended during school holidays and are to re-commence after the term holidays as if those holidays had not occurred.
long summer school holidays  in the 2023/2024 long summer school holidays, and in alternate years thereafter: (i) with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) on the last day of term 4 until 5:00pm on the third friday of the long summer school holidays, and (ii) with the father from 5:00pm on the third friday of the long summer school holidays until the commencement of school in term 1 of the new school year. (b) in the 2024/2025 long summer school holidays, and in alternate years thereafter: (i) with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) on the last day of term 4 until 5:00pm on the third friday of the long summer school holidays, and (ii) with the mother from 5:00pm on the third friday of the long summer school holidays until the commencement of school in term 1 of the new school year.   with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) on the last day of term 4 until 5:00pm on the third friday of the long summer school holidays, and (ii) with the father from 5:00pm on the third friday of the long summer school holidays until the commencement of school in term 1 of the new school year.  ) with the father from 5:00pm on the third friday of the long summer school holidays until the commencement of school in term 1 of the new school year.   in the 2024/2025 long summer school holidays, and in alternate years thereafter: (i) with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) on the last day of term 4 until 5:00pm on the third friday of the long summer school holidays, and (ii) with the mother from 5:00pm on the third friday of the long summer school holidays until the commencement of school in term 1 of the new school year.   with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) on the last day of term 4 until 5:00pm on the third friday of the long summer school holidays, and (ii) with the mother from 5:00pm on the third friday of the long summer school holidays until the commencement of school in term 1 of the new school year.  ) with the mother from 5:00pm on the third friday of the long summer school holidays until the commencement of school in term 1 of the new school year.
and that the parties' usual times as set out in paragraph 2 of these orders be suspended during long summer school holidays and are to re-commence after at the beginning of term 1 of the new school year.
special occasions  on mother's day each year, from 3:30pm on the afternoon before mother's day until 8:00pm on mother's day, (b) on the mother's birthday as follows: (i) if a school day from conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) to 8:30pm, or (ii) if a non-school day from 5:00pm the day before the mother's birthday until the commencement of school the following day (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (c) for easter: (i) in even numbered years, from 3:30pm easter saturday until 3:30pm on easter sunday, (ii) in odd numbered years, from 3:30pm easter sunday until 3:30pm on easter monday. (d) for christmas as follows: (i) in odd numbered years from 3:30pm on christmas eve until 3:30pm christmas day, and (ii) in even numbered years from 3:30pm on christmas day until 3:30pm on boxing day, (e) for the event b held in town c (noting that the dates change each year), from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-attendance day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-attendance day), with the mother to provide the father 14 days' written notice of the date of the event b. (f) for the event d (or such name as determined by the event organisers or as used that year) event (noting that the dates change each year), from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-attendance day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-attendance day), with the mother to provide the father 14 days' written notice of the date of the event d. (g) otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.   on the mother's birthday as follows: (i) if a school day from conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) to 8:30pm, or (ii) if a non-school day from 5:00pm the day before the mother's birthday until the commencement of school the following day (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (c) for easter: (i) in even numbered years, from 3:30pm easter saturday until 3:30pm on easter sunday, (ii) in odd numbered years, from 3:30pm easter sunday until 3:30pm on easter monday. (d) for christmas as follows: (i) in odd numbered years from 3:30pm on christmas eve until 3:30pm christmas day, and (ii) in even numbered years from 3:30pm on christmas day until 3:30pm on boxing day, (e) for the event b held in town c (noting that the dates change each year), from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-attendance day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-attendance day), with the mother to provide the father 14 days' written notice of the date of the event b. (f) for the event d (or such name as determined by the event organisers or as used that year) event (noting that the dates change each year), from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-attendance day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-attendance day), with the mother to provide the father 14 days' written notice of the date of the event d. (g) otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.   if a school day from conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) to 8:30pm, or (ii) if a non-school day from 5:00pm the day before the mother's birthday until the commencement of school the following day (or 9:00am if a non-school day).  ) if a non-school day from 5:00pm the day before the mother's birthday until the commencement of school the following day (or 9:00am if a non-school day).   for easter: (i) in even numbered years, from 3:30pm easter saturday until 3:30pm on easter sunday, (ii) in odd numbered years, from 3:30pm easter sunday until 3:30pm on easter monday. (d) for christmas as follows: (i) in odd numbered years from 3:30pm on christmas eve until 3:30pm christmas day, and (ii) in even numbered years from 3:30pm on christmas day until 3:30pm on boxing day, (e) for the event b held in town c (noting that the dates change each year), from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-attendance day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-attendance day), with the mother to provide the father 14 days' written notice of the date of the event b. (f) for the event d (or such name as determined by the event organisers or as used that year) event (noting that the dates change each year), from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-attendance day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-attendance day), with the mother to provide the father 14 days' written notice of the date of the event d. (g) otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.   in even numbered years, from 3:30pm easter saturday until 3:30pm on easter sunday, (ii) in odd numbered years, from 3:30pm easter sunday until 3:30pm on easter monday.  ) in odd numbered years, from 3:30pm easter sunday until 3:30pm on easter monday.   for christmas as follows: (i) in odd numbered years from 3:30pm on christmas eve until 3:30pm christmas day, and (ii) in even numbered years from 3:30pm on christmas day until 3:30pm on boxing day, (e) for the event b held in town c (noting that the dates change each year), from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-attendance day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-attendance day), with the mother to provide the father 14 days' written notice of the date of the event b. (f) for the event d (or such name as determined by the event organisers or as used that year) event (noting that the dates change each year), from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-attendance day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-attendance day), with the mother to provide the father 14 days' written notice of the date of the event d. (g) otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.   in odd numbered years from 3:30pm on christmas eve until 3:30pm christmas day, and (ii) in even numbered years from 3:30pm on christmas day until 3:30pm on boxing day,  ) in even numbered years from 3:30pm on christmas day until 3:30pm on boxing day,   for the event b held in town c (noting that the dates change each year), from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-attendance day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-attendance day), with the mother to provide the father 14 days' written notice of the date of the event b. (f) for the event d (or such name as determined by the event organisers or as used that year) event (noting that the dates change each year), from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-attendance day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-attendance day), with the mother to provide the father 14 days' written notice of the date of the event d. (g) otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.   for the event d (or such name as determined by the event organisers or as used that year) event (noting that the dates change each year), from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-attendance day) on friday until the commencement of school on monday (or 9:00am if a non-attendance day), with the mother to provide the father 14 days' written notice of the date of the event d. (g) otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.   otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.   on father's day each year, from 3:30pm on the afternoon before father's day until 8:00pm on father's day. (b) on the father's birthday as follows: (i) if a school day from conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) to 8:30pm, or (ii) if a non-school day from 5:00pm the day before the father's birthday until the commencement of school the following day (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (c) for easter: (i) in even numbered years from 3:30pm easter sunday until 3:30pm on easter monday, (ii) in odd numbered years from 3:30pm on easter saturday until 3:30pm on easter sunday. (d) for christmas: (i) in odd numbered years, from 3:30pm christmas day until 3:30pm on boxing day, and (ii) in even numbered years, from 3:30pm christmas eve until 3:30pm on christmas day. (e) for diwali each year (on the relevant date in all years) from the conclusion of school on the day before diwali (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) the day after diwali, with the father to provide the mother 14 days' written notice of the date of diwali. (f) for event e each year from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) on the day before event e until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) the day after event e, with the father to provide the mother 14 days' written notice of the date of event e. (g) otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.   on the father's birthday as follows: (i) if a school day from conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) to 8:30pm, or (ii) if a non-school day from 5:00pm the day before the father's birthday until the commencement of school the following day (or 9:00am if a non-school day). (c) for easter: (i) in even numbered years from 3:30pm easter sunday until 3:30pm on easter monday, (ii) in odd numbered years from 3:30pm on easter saturday until 3:30pm on easter sunday. (d) for christmas: (i) in odd numbered years, from 3:30pm christmas day until 3:30pm on boxing day, and (ii) in even numbered years, from 3:30pm christmas eve until 3:30pm on christmas day. (e) for diwali each year (on the relevant date in all years) from the conclusion of school on the day before diwali (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) the day after diwali, with the father to provide the mother 14 days' written notice of the date of diwali. (f) for event e each year from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) on the day before event e until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) the day after event e, with the father to provide the mother 14 days' written notice of the date of event e. (g) otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.   if a school day from conclusion of school (or 3:30pm) to 8:30pm, or (ii) if a non-school day from 5:00pm the day before the father's birthday until the commencement of school the following day (or 9:00am if a non-school day).  ) if a non-school day from 5:00pm the day before the father's birthday until the commencement of school the following day (or 9:00am if a non-school day).   for easter: (i) in even numbered years from 3:30pm easter sunday until 3:30pm on easter monday, (ii) in odd numbered years from 3:30pm on easter saturday until 3:30pm on easter sunday. (d) for christmas: (i) in odd numbered years, from 3:30pm christmas day until 3:30pm on boxing day, and (ii) in even numbered years, from 3:30pm christmas eve until 3:30pm on christmas day. (e) for diwali each year (on the relevant date in all years) from the conclusion of school on the day before diwali (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) the day after diwali, with the father to provide the mother 14 days' written notice of the date of diwali. (f) for event e each year from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) on the day before event e until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) the day after event e, with the father to provide the mother 14 days' written notice of the date of event e. (g) otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.   in even numbered years from 3:30pm easter sunday until 3:30pm on easter monday, (ii) in odd numbered years from 3:30pm on easter saturday until 3:30pm on easter sunday.  ) in odd numbered years from 3:30pm on easter saturday until 3:30pm on easter sunday.   for christmas: (i) in odd numbered years, from 3:30pm christmas day until 3:30pm on boxing day, and (ii) in even numbered years, from 3:30pm christmas eve until 3:30pm on christmas day. (e) for diwali each year (on the relevant date in all years) from the conclusion of school on the day before diwali (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) the day after diwali, with the father to provide the mother 14 days' written notice of the date of diwali. (f) for event e each year from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) on the day before event e until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) the day after event e, with the father to provide the mother 14 days' written notice of the date of event e. (g) otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.   in odd numbered years, from 3:30pm christmas day until 3:30pm on boxing day, and (ii) in even numbered years, from 3:30pm christmas eve until 3:30pm on christmas day.  ) in even numbered years, from 3:30pm christmas eve until 3:30pm on christmas day.   for diwali each year (on the relevant date in all years) from the conclusion of school on the day before diwali (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) the day after diwali, with the father to provide the mother 14 days' written notice of the date of diwali. (f) for event e each year from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) on the day before event e until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) the day after event e, with the father to provide the mother 14 days' written notice of the date of event e. (g) otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.   for event e each year from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) on the day before event e until the commencement of school (or 9:00am if a non-school day) the day after event e, with the father to provide the mother 14 days' written notice of the date of event e. (g) otherwise as may be agreed between the parties in writing including text message or email.
changeover
communication and authorisations  their current residential address, and (b) their home, mobile telephone numbers and email address.   their home, mobile telephone numbers and email address.
schooling
medical issues/emergencies
travel  as much notice as possible to travel interstate in the event they are staying overnight, and (b) an itinerary of travel destinations, flight numbers, dates and times of departure and arrival, emergency contact numbers and details of accommodation at least 7 days prior to such travel, (c) the above provisions do not apply to covid-era “border bubble” towns of victoria.   an itinerary of travel destinations, flight numbers, dates and times of departure and arrival, emergency contact numbers and details of accommodation at least 7 days prior to such travel, (c) the above provisions do not apply to covid-era “border bubble” towns of victoria.   the above provisions do not apply to covid-era “border bubble” towns of victoria.
injunctions  interrogating x about the other parent's household, family or friends or activities, (b) smoking cigarettes in the immediate vicinity of x or permitting any third person to do so, (c) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party to or in the presence or hearing of x and/or from permitting any other person to do so, and/or (d) discussing these proceedings to or in the presence or hearing of x and/or from permitting any other person to do so.   smoking cigarettes in the immediate vicinity of x or permitting any third person to do so, (c) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party to or in the presence or hearing of x and/or from permitting any other person to do so, and/or (d) discussing these proceedings to or in the presence or hearing of x and/or from permitting any other person to do so.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party to or in the presence or hearing of x and/or from permitting any other person to do so, and/or (d) discussing these proceedings to or in the presence or hearing of x and/or from permitting any other person to do so.   discussing these proceedings to or in the presence or hearing of x and/or from permitting any other person to do so.
other
and the court orders that:
x’s birthday  the father be responsible for organising such birthday party for x in odd years and that he ensure that the mother is provided reasonable notice of such event, and (b) the mother be responsible for organising such birthday party for x in even numbered years and that she ensure that the father is provided reasonable notice of such event, and (c) the organising parent may invite the other parent to attend as the organising party sees fit.   the mother be responsible for organising such birthday party for x in even numbered years and that she ensure that the father is provided reasonable notice of such event, and (c) the organising parent may invite the other parent to attend as the organising party sees fit.   the organising parent may invite the other parent to attend as the organising party sees fit.   an itinerary of travel destinations including return tickets, flight numbers, dates and times of departure and arrival, emergency contact numbers and details of accommodation and travel insurance at least 28 days prior to such travel. (b) the party in possession of x’s passport ensure that x’s passport is made available for any necessary visa application and for travel to the travelling party as soon as practical after the travelling party has requested the passport, and (c) the travelling party must obtain travel insurance for the travelling parent and x.   the party in possession of x’s passport ensure that x’s passport is made available for any necessary visa application and for travel to the travelling party as soon as practical after the travelling party has requested the passport, and (c) the travelling party must obtain travel insurance for the travelling parent and x.   the travelling party must obtain travel insurance for the travelling parent and x.   that upon successful renewal the passport remains in the possession of the mother, (b) at the conclusion of travel/visa application the passport is to be returned to the mother within 14 days.   at the conclusion of travel/visa application the passport is to be returned to the mother within 14 days.
and the court notes that:  the parents will try to come to an agreement and consider a family member or such other person to assist in resolving the dispute, and/or (b) attend dispute resolution.   attend dispute resolution.   all agreed school fees and school expenses (including uniforms, schoolbooks, camps, excursions and tutors), (b) all agreed extracurricular activities, and (c) all agreed out of pocket medical and dental expenses.   all agreed extracurricular activities, and (c) all agreed out of pocket medical and dental expenses.   all agreed out of pocket medical and dental expenses.
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
documents relied upon
exhibits tendered
applicable law
standard of proof   in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
parenting
60ca: child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests
determining child's best interests (1) subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3). primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,  the nature of the relationship of the child with: each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and  ) to spend time with the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  the capacity of: each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: (i) the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: (i) the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the child's right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and (ii) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right, (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
... 65dac effect of parenting order that provides for shared parental responsibility   this section applies if, under a parenting order: (a) 2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child. (2) the order is taken to require the decision to be made jointly by those persons. (3) the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue. (4) to avoid doubt, this section does not require any other person to establish, before acting on a decision about the child communicated by one of those persons, that the decision has been made jointly.   2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child.   the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child.   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.  tations omitted]
the issues in contention
... [the father’s] pds profile indicates markedly elevated im and moderately sde subscales. this profile is usually found in individuals who are aware of their shortcomings, but want to appear publicly acceptable. in this case, the im scale score is extremely high indicating a great likelihood of socially desirable responding. test results are likely to be overly positive and probably not valid. implicit or explicit demands of the situation may have promoted socially desirable responding. overall, overly positive self-presentation is probable. there is a high likelihood of invalid responses.
... [the mother] acknowledged that she lacked education regarding mental health problems. it appears that she has maintained a level of concern given the stress associated with [the father’s] presentations in 2016 and 2017. she also had concerns that [the father] may experience undue stress whilst working as a [public servant]. she has notably not received much information regarding [the father’s] mental health status over the last four years following separation. [the mother] did not report any specific basis to recent and ongoing concerns other than [the father’s] past history. she can be reassured that [the father] has been mentally well. he reported that he has thrived whilst working as a [public servant]. he has benefited from not being in a stressful marriage. there has been no indication that his mental health has been compromised. his mental health has been stable and is not a limiting factor in regards to his parenting capacity. [the father’s] mental health has been effectively managed by his gp. there is no indication that he currently requires additional professional input. [the mother] has supported [the father’s] relationship with [x]. she has accommodated his shift work. [the father] has had unsupervised contact with [x] since separation. [the mother] has not reported any concerns regarding [the father’s] care of [x].
... it is recommended that the current interim care arrangements be made into final orders, as they are very comprehensive.
birthday parties  the father be responsible for organising such birthday party for x in odd years and that he ensure that the mother is provided reasonable notice of such event. (b) the mother be responsible for organising such birthday party for x in even-numbered years and that she ensure that the father be provided reasonable notice of such event. (c) the organising parent may invite the other parent to attend if he or she sees fit.   the mother be responsible for organising such birthday party for x in even-numbered years and that she ensure that the father be provided reasonable notice of such event. (c) the organising parent may invite the other parent to attend if he or she sees fit.   the organising parent may invite the other parent to attend if he or she sees fit.
the father’s health
special occasions
emergency contacts
new partner name
major life decisions
other orders
travel arrangement
the passport
watch list
future partners
section 102na
102na mandatory protections for parties in certain cases   if, in proceedings under this act: (a) a party (the examining party) intends to cross‑examine another party (the witness party), and (b) there is an allegation of family violence between the examining party and the witness party, and (c) any of the following are satisfied: (i) either party has been convicted of, or is charged with, an offence involving violence, or a threat of violence, to the other party, (ii) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination,   a party (the examining party) intends to cross‑examine another party (the witness party), and (b) there is an allegation of family violence between the examining party and the witness party, and (c) any of the following are satisfied: (i) either party has been convicted of, or is charged with, an offence involving violence, or a threat of violence, to the other party, (ii) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination,   there is an allegation of family violence between the examining party and the witness party, and (c) any of the following are satisfied: (i) either party has been convicted of, or is charged with, an offence involving violence, or a threat of violence, to the other party, (ii) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination,   any of the following are satisfied: (i) either party has been convicted of, or is charged with, an offence involving violence, or a threat of violence, to the other party, (ii) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination,   either party has been convicted of, or is charged with, an offence involving violence, or a threat of violence, to the other party, (ii) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination,  ) a family violence order (other than an interim order) applies to both parties, (iii) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination,  i) an injunction under section 68b or 114 for the personal protection of either party is directed against the other party, (iv) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination,  ) the court makes an order that the requirements of subsection (2) are to apply to the cross‑examination,
then the requirements of subsection (2) apply to the cross‑examination.  both of the following requirements apply to the cross‑examination: (a) the examining party must not cross‑examine the witness party personally, (b) the cross‑examination must be conducted by a legal practitioner acting on behalf of the examining party. (3) the court may make an order under subparagraph (1)(c)(iv):   the examining party must not cross‑examine the witness party personally, (b) the cross‑examination must be conducted by a legal practitioner acting on behalf of the examining party.   the cross‑examination must be conducted by a legal practitioner acting on behalf of the examining party.  on its own initiative, or (b) on the application of: (i) the witness party, or (ii) the examining party, or (iii) if an independent children’s lawyer has been appointed for a child in relation to the proceedings—that lawyer.   the witness party, or (ii) the examining party, or (iii) if an independent children’s lawyer has been appointed for a child in relation to the proceedings—that lawyer.  ) the examining party, or (iii) if an independent children’s lawyer has been appointed for a child in relation to the proceedings—that lawyer.  i) if an independent children’s lawyer has been appointed for a child in relation to the proceedings—that lawyer.
25 the relevant order provides: both parties will be restrained from denigrating each other (or each other’s extended family) in the presence or hearing of the children and both parties will do all things necessary to ensure that no other person makes critical comments about the other party (or the other party’s family) in the presence or hearing of the children. it was not controversial the march 2012 order could only have been made pursuant to the power conferred by s 68b of the act. the injunction was made for the welfare of the children, and not for the protection of the children, nor for the protection of either of the parties. the order sought to be relied upon could not possibly be construed as including any degree of personal protection for a spouse who would not necessarily be present. it cannot automatically engage the prohibition on personal cross-examination, as contemplated by s 102na(1)(c)(iii). we accept that the primary judge mistakenly considered that an automatic consideration applied to invoke a prohibition on personal cross-examination, when it did not. there is merit in this complaint. [emphasis added]
4ab definition of family violence etc.   for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person’s family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful. (2) examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are not limited to): (a) an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty. (3) for the purposes of this act, a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence. (4) examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family violence include (but are not limited to) the child: (a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member’s family, of his or her liberty.   overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the child’s family towards another member of the child’s family, or (b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family, or (c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s family, or (d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s family, or (e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving the assault of a member of the child’s family by another member of the child’s family.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party, and/or (b) discussing these proceedings,   discussing these proceedings,
to or in the presence or hearing of [x] and/or from permitting any other person so to do.
ms morrison: your honour, our order in paragraph 12 of the orders going back to 6 july does go that one step further because it says “abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking”. to me, i would submit that that party needs to be in your presence when you do that. his honour: yes. thank you. i was - - - ms morrison: so it implies an element of a physical presence.
i note there is order 12 on page 4 of interim orders dated 6/7/2021 stating “the parties, by themselves, their servants and/or their agents be and are hereby restrained by injunction from: (a) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party,...” which i believe is classed as personal protection of a parent of the child as per family law act 1975 – sect 68b, point 1bi.
the first duty of a court is to administer justice according to law. however in the case of an inferior court operating within a system where the doctrine of precedent applies, the existence of authority binding upon it determines for it what it must understand to be the law. it must accept the law to be as that precedent authority has declared it to be, whatever may be its own inclinations in the matter. the sanction implicit in the doctrine of precedent is simple and effective: if an inferior court fails to observe the doctrine the superior court will correct its decision on appeal ...
... the position is that the full court has laid down the law and i am bound to follow it, right or wrong.  cc(2)](b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. ... [60cc(3)](j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family,
associate: dated: 7 march 2023
dated: 7 march 2023