last updated: 5 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gare & farlow [2023] fedcfamc2f 109
orders
the court orders that:
property
real property  either refinance the mortgage over the b street, suburb c property into her own name, or otherwise arrange a discharge of the mortgage, (b) make payment to the husband of $410,542, and (c) do all things and acts necessary to arrange a withdrawal of caveat ... lodged by her over the d street, town e property.   make payment to the husband of $410,542, and (c) do all things and acts necessary to arrange a withdrawal of caveat ... lodged by her over the d street, town e property.   do all things and acts necessary to arrange a withdrawal of caveat ... lodged by her over the d street, town e property.
personal property
f pty ltd
liabilities
miscellaneous  monies standing to the credit of either party in any bank account are to become the property of the owner named thereon, (b) the parties shall each retain their own superannuation interests, (c) insurance policies remain the sole property of the beneficiary named therein, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   the parties shall each retain their own superannuation interests, (c) insurance policies remain the sole property of the beneficiary named therein, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the beneficiary named therein, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
parenting
the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the children of the marriage, x born in 2010 (“x”) and y born in 2012 (“y”) and collectively known as the (“children”).  during school terms: (i) each wednesday evening from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm on a non-school day) until 8pm, and (ii) each alternate weekend, from the conclusion of school friday (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) until 7pm sunday. (b) during the school term holidays, for one week as agreed, or failing agreement commencing on the friday the children would ordinarily be spending with the husband pursuant to paragraph 16(a)(ii) until 5pm on the following saturday. (c) during the long summer holiday period, for one half as agreed and failing agreement: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the husband for the second half of the period between the end of the government gazetted school year and 2 january the following calendar year, and week about from 2 january until the conclusion of the school holidays, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband for the first half of the period between the end of the government gazetted school year and 2 january the following calendar year, and week about from 2 january until the conclusion of the school holidays. (d) at other times by agreement between the parties.   each wednesday evening from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm on a non-school day) until 8pm, and (ii) each alternate weekend, from the conclusion of school friday (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) until 7pm sunday.  ) each alternate weekend, from the conclusion of school friday (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) until 7pm sunday.   during the school term holidays, for one week as agreed, or failing agreement commencing on the friday the children would ordinarily be spending with the husband pursuant to paragraph 16(a)(ii) until 5pm on the following saturday. (c) during the long summer holiday period, for one half as agreed and failing agreement: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the husband for the second half of the period between the end of the government gazetted school year and 2 january the following calendar year, and week about from 2 january until the conclusion of the school holidays, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband for the first half of the period between the end of the government gazetted school year and 2 january the following calendar year, and week about from 2 january until the conclusion of the school holidays. (d) at other times by agreement between the parties.   during the long summer holiday period, for one half as agreed and failing agreement: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the husband for the second half of the period between the end of the government gazetted school year and 2 january the following calendar year, and week about from 2 january until the conclusion of the school holidays, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband for the first half of the period between the end of the government gazetted school year and 2 january the following calendar year, and week about from 2 january until the conclusion of the school holidays. (d) at other times by agreement between the parties.   in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the husband for the second half of the period between the end of the government gazetted school year and 2 january the following calendar year, and week about from 2 january until the conclusion of the school holidays, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband for the first half of the period between the end of the government gazetted school year and 2 january the following calendar year, and week about from 2 january until the conclusion of the school holidays.  ) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband for the first half of the period between the end of the government gazetted school year and 2 january the following calendar year, and week about from 2 january until the conclusion of the school holidays.   at other times by agreement between the parties.   during school terms: (i) in week 1, from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) thursday until the commencement of school friday (or 9am if a non-school day), and (ii) in week 2, from the conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non-school day) until the commencement of school monday. (b) during the school term holidays, in accordance with paragraph 16(b) hereof. (c) during the long summer holiday period, in accordance with paragraph 16(c) hereof. (d) at other times by agreement between the parties.   in week 1, from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) thursday until the commencement of school friday (or 9am if a non-school day), and (ii) in week 2, from the conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non-school day) until the commencement of school monday.  ) in week 2, from the conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non-school day) until the commencement of school monday.   during the school term holidays, in accordance with paragraph 16(b) hereof. (c) during the long summer holiday period, in accordance with paragraph 16(c) hereof. (d) at other times by agreement between the parties.   during the long summer holiday period, in accordance with paragraph 16(c) hereof. (d) at other times by agreement between the parties.   for the first, second and third months after the husband obtains his own residence (whether rental or otherwise): (i) in week 1, from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) thursday until 8pm, and (ii) in week 2: from the conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non-school day) until 8pm, and from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school monday. (b) for the fourth, fifth and sixth months after the husband obtains his own residence (whether rental or otherwise): (i) in week 1, from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) thursday until the commencement of school friday, and (ii) in week 2: from the conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non- school day) until 8pm, and from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school monday. (c) at other times by agreement between the parties.   in week 1, from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) thursday until 8pm, and (ii) in week 2: from the conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non-school day) until 8pm, and from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school monday.  ) in week 2: from the conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non-school day) until 8pm, and from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school monday.   for the fourth, fifth and sixth months after the husband obtains his own residence (whether rental or otherwise): (i) in week 1, from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) thursday until the commencement of school friday, and (ii) in week 2: from the conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non- school day) until 8pm, and from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school monday. (c) at other times by agreement between the parties.   in week 1, from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) thursday until the commencement of school friday, and (ii) in week 2: from the conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non- school day) until 8pm, and from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school monday.  ) in week 2: from the conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non- school day) until 8pm, and from the conclusion of school friday until the commencement of school monday.   at other times by agreement between the parties.   on father’s day weekend, with the husband from 5pm on the saturday until the commencement of school monday, (b) on mother’s day weekend, with the wife from 5pm on the saturday until the commencement of school monday, (c) on the children’s birthdays: (i) if a school day, with the parent they would not otherwise be spending the night with from the conclusion of school until 8pm, (ii) if a non-school day, with the parent they would not otherwise be spending the night with as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm, (d) on the wife’s birthday, with the wife: (i) if a school day, from the conclusion of school until from 8pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm, (e) on the husband’s birthday, with the husband: (i) if a school day, from the conclusion of school until from 8pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm, (f) on easter long weekend: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the wife from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the husband from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday. (g) for christmas: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the husband from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the wife from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day. (iii) otherwise, by agreement between the parties in writing.   on mother’s day weekend, with the wife from 5pm on the saturday until the commencement of school monday, (c) on the children’s birthdays: (i) if a school day, with the parent they would not otherwise be spending the night with from the conclusion of school until 8pm, (ii) if a non-school day, with the parent they would not otherwise be spending the night with as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm, (d) on the wife’s birthday, with the wife: (i) if a school day, from the conclusion of school until from 8pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm, (e) on the husband’s birthday, with the husband: (i) if a school day, from the conclusion of school until from 8pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm, (f) on easter long weekend: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the wife from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the husband from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday. (g) for christmas: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the husband from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the wife from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day. (iii) otherwise, by agreement between the parties in writing.   on the children’s birthdays: (i) if a school day, with the parent they would not otherwise be spending the night with from the conclusion of school until 8pm, (ii) if a non-school day, with the parent they would not otherwise be spending the night with as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm, (d) on the wife’s birthday, with the wife: (i) if a school day, from the conclusion of school until from 8pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm, (e) on the husband’s birthday, with the husband: (i) if a school day, from the conclusion of school until from 8pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm, (f) on easter long weekend: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the wife from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the husband from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday. (g) for christmas: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the husband from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the wife from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day. (iii) otherwise, by agreement between the parties in writing.   if a school day, with the parent they would not otherwise be spending the night with from the conclusion of school until 8pm, (ii) if a non-school day, with the parent they would not otherwise be spending the night with as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm,  ) if a non-school day, with the parent they would not otherwise be spending the night with as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm,   on the wife’s birthday, with the wife: (i) if a school day, from the conclusion of school until from 8pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm, (e) on the husband’s birthday, with the husband: (i) if a school day, from the conclusion of school until from 8pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm, (f) on easter long weekend: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the wife from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the husband from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday. (g) for christmas: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the husband from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the wife from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day. (iii) otherwise, by agreement between the parties in writing.   if a school day, from the conclusion of school until from 8pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm,  ) if a non-school day, as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm,   on the husband’s birthday, with the husband: (i) if a school day, from the conclusion of school until from 8pm, and (ii) if a non-school day, as agreed and failing agreement from 10am until 4pm, (f) on easter long weekend: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the wife from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the husband from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday. (g) for christmas: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the husband from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the wife from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day. (iii) otherwise, by agreement between the parties in writing.   on easter long weekend: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the wife from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the husband from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday. (g) for christmas: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the husband from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the wife from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day. (iii) otherwise, by agreement between the parties in writing.   in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the wife from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the husband from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday.  ) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3.30pm on the thursday prior to easter (or the conclusion of school if a school day) until 11am on easter sunday and with the husband from 11am easter sunday until 7pm on easter monday.   for christmas: (i) in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the husband from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the wife from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day. (iii) otherwise, by agreement between the parties in writing.   in 2023 and each odd numbered year thereafter, with the wife from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the husband from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day, and (ii) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the wife from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day. (iii) otherwise, by agreement between the parties in writing.  ) in 2024 and each even numbered year thereafter, with the husband from 3pm christmas eve until 3pm christmas day and with the wife from 3pm christmas day until 3pm boxing day. (iii) otherwise, by agreement between the parties in writing.  i) otherwise, by agreement between the parties in writing.   the travelling parent must provide to the other with not less than 14 days’ notice in writing of their intention to travel interstate, and (b) the travelling party must provide the other with a written itinerary for interstate travel including flight plans, accommodation arrangements and emergency contact details not less than 7 days in advance of their departure, and (c) any international travel with the children must be agreed upon in writing and that without such consent, the travel will not occur. neither party shall unreasonably withhold consent.   the travelling party must provide the other with a written itinerary for interstate travel including flight plans, accommodation arrangements and emergency contact details not less than 7 days in advance of their departure, and (c) any international travel with the children must be agreed upon in writing and that without such consent, the travel will not occur. neither party shall unreasonably withhold consent.   any international travel with the children must be agreed upon in writing and that without such consent, the travel will not occur. neither party shall unreasonably withhold consent.
costs
federal circuit and family court of australia at melbourne mlg 10265 of 2019 ms gare applicant and mr farlow respondent reasons for judgment
mlg 10265 of 2019 ms gare applicant and mr farlow respondent reasons for judgment
ms gare applicant and mr farlow respondent reasons for judgment
applicant and mr farlow respondent reasons for judgment
and mr farlow respondent reasons for judgment
mr farlow respondent reasons for judgment
respondent reasons for judgment
reasons for judgment
table of contents
reasons for judgment
judge forbes
introduction
material relied upon  amended initiating application filed on 13 september 2021, (b) trial affidavit of ms gare filed on 24 january 2022, (c) financial statement filed on 10 february 2022, (d) affidavit of forensic accountant, mr g filed on 17 january 2022, (e) affidavit of the wife’s father, mr k filed on 28 september 2022, (f) affidavit of property valuer, mr l filed on 4 february 2022, and (g) affidavit of psychologist, dr j filed on 31 january 2022.   trial affidavit of ms gare filed on 24 january 2022, (c) financial statement filed on 10 february 2022, (d) affidavit of forensic accountant, mr g filed on 17 january 2022, (e) affidavit of the wife’s father, mr k filed on 28 september 2022, (f) affidavit of property valuer, mr l filed on 4 february 2022, and (g) affidavit of psychologist, dr j filed on 31 january 2022.   financial statement filed on 10 february 2022, (d) affidavit of forensic accountant, mr g filed on 17 january 2022, (e) affidavit of the wife’s father, mr k filed on 28 september 2022, (f) affidavit of property valuer, mr l filed on 4 february 2022, and (g) affidavit of psychologist, dr j filed on 31 january 2022.   affidavit of forensic accountant, mr g filed on 17 january 2022, (e) affidavit of the wife’s father, mr k filed on 28 september 2022, (f) affidavit of property valuer, mr l filed on 4 february 2022, and (g) affidavit of psychologist, dr j filed on 31 january 2022.   affidavit of the wife’s father, mr k filed on 28 september 2022, (f) affidavit of property valuer, mr l filed on 4 february 2022, and (g) affidavit of psychologist, dr j filed on 31 january 2022.   affidavit of property valuer, mr l filed on 4 february 2022, and (g) affidavit of psychologist, dr j filed on 31 january 2022.   affidavit of psychologist, dr j filed on 31 january 2022.   third amended response to initiating application filed on 4 february 2022, (b) trial affidavit of mr farlow filed on 4 february 2022, (c) financial statement filed on 4 february 2022, (d) affidavit of dr j filed on 31 january 2022, (e) affidavit of mr l filed on 4 february 2022, and (f) two affidavits of business valuer, mr h filed on 1 february 2022 and 11 february 2022.   trial affidavit of mr farlow filed on 4 february 2022, (c) financial statement filed on 4 february 2022, (d) affidavit of dr j filed on 31 january 2022, (e) affidavit of mr l filed on 4 february 2022, and (f) two affidavits of business valuer, mr h filed on 1 february 2022 and 11 february 2022.   financial statement filed on 4 february 2022, (d) affidavit of dr j filed on 31 january 2022, (e) affidavit of mr l filed on 4 february 2022, and (f) two affidavits of business valuer, mr h filed on 1 february 2022 and 11 february 2022.   affidavit of dr j filed on 31 january 2022, (e) affidavit of mr l filed on 4 february 2022, and (f) two affidavits of business valuer, mr h filed on 1 february 2022 and 11 february 2022.   affidavit of mr l filed on 4 february 2022, and (f) two affidavits of business valuer, mr h filed on 1 february 2022 and 11 february 2022.   two affidavits of business valuer, mr h filed on 1 february 2022 and 11 february 2022.
background and procedural history
family law proceedings
final hearing - property
relevant principles  identify and value, as at the date of hearing, the parties’ property, liabilities and financial resources, (b) identify and assess the contributions, under s 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) of the family law act 1975 (“the act”) (“the first limb – the contribution factors”), of the parties and express them as a percentage of the net value of the property (examined on either a global approach or an asset by asset approach, depending on the circumstances of the case), (c) identify and assess the other factors relevant under s 79(4)(d), (e), (f) & (g), (“the second limb – ongoing needs and effect of orders”) including, because of s 79(4)(e), the matters referred to in s 75(2), and determine the adjustment (if any) to be made to the contribution entitlements at step two, and (d) consider the effect of the above and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.   identify and assess the contributions, under s 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) of the family law act 1975 (“the act”) (“the first limb – the contribution factors”), of the parties and express them as a percentage of the net value of the property (examined on either a global approach or an asset by asset approach, depending on the circumstances of the case), (c) identify and assess the other factors relevant under s 79(4)(d), (e), (f) & (g), (“the second limb – ongoing needs and effect of orders”) including, because of s 79(4)(e), the matters referred to in s 75(2), and determine the adjustment (if any) to be made to the contribution entitlements at step two, and (d) consider the effect of the above and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.   identify and assess the other factors relevant under s 79(4)(d), (e), (f) & (g), (“the second limb – ongoing needs and effect of orders”) including, because of s 79(4)(e), the matters referred to in s 75(2), and determine the adjustment (if any) to be made to the contribution entitlements at step two, and (d) consider the effect of the above and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.   consider the effect of the above and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.
“stanford will also serve as a reminder that the four step process “merely illuminates the path to the ultimate result”. any future restatement of that process should incorporate acceptance of the fact that the power to make any order adjusting property interests is conditioned upon the court finding that it is just and equitable to make an order.”
identifying the parties’ legal and equitable interests
issues in dispute  the proper valuation of the wife’s business and the methodology to be used for the purposes of establishing that valuation, (b) whether the “loan repayment” of approximately $106,000 made by the wife to her father in august 2018 should be “added back” into the matrimonial asset pool, (c) the valuation of the “shed contents” removed and retained by the husband post‑separation, (d) the valuation of household chattels retained by the wife post-separation, and (e) whether each party’s post-separation borrowings from family members (substantially in relation to legal fees) should properly be included as a liability on the matrimonial balance sheet.   whether the “loan repayment” of approximately $106,000 made by the wife to her father in august 2018 should be “added back” into the matrimonial asset pool, (c) the valuation of the “shed contents” removed and retained by the husband post‑separation, (d) the valuation of household chattels retained by the wife post-separation, and (e) whether each party’s post-separation borrowings from family members (substantially in relation to legal fees) should properly be included as a liability on the matrimonial balance sheet.   the valuation of the “shed contents” removed and retained by the husband post‑separation, (d) the valuation of household chattels retained by the wife post-separation, and (e) whether each party’s post-separation borrowings from family members (substantially in relation to legal fees) should properly be included as a liability on the matrimonial balance sheet.   the valuation of household chattels retained by the wife post-separation, and (e) whether each party’s post-separation borrowings from family members (substantially in relation to legal fees) should properly be included as a liability on the matrimonial balance sheet.   whether each party’s post-separation borrowings from family members (substantially in relation to legal fees) should properly be included as a liability on the matrimonial balance sheet.   the proper assessment of the parties’ initial contributions and the extent to which the wife’s initial contribution was greater than the husband’s, (b) whether the wife’s greater initial contribution should be given weight as a springboard for the parties’ future accumulation of wealth, (c) whether the husband’s financial contributions (principally to the mortgage) should be regarded as having been offset or diminished by his withdrawals for personal expenditure, (d) the proper assessment of the parties’ non-financial contributions including the wife’s homemaker and parental responsibilities, (e) in terms of future needs, the true future income potential for each of the husband and wife, and (f) while no superannuation split is sought, whether the difference in superannuation balances should be taken into account as a discretionary adjustment in favour of the husband.   whether the wife’s greater initial contribution should be given weight as a springboard for the parties’ future accumulation of wealth, (c) whether the husband’s financial contributions (principally to the mortgage) should be regarded as having been offset or diminished by his withdrawals for personal expenditure, (d) the proper assessment of the parties’ non-financial contributions including the wife’s homemaker and parental responsibilities, (e) in terms of future needs, the true future income potential for each of the husband and wife, and (f) while no superannuation split is sought, whether the difference in superannuation balances should be taken into account as a discretionary adjustment in favour of the husband.   whether the husband’s financial contributions (principally to the mortgage) should be regarded as having been offset or diminished by his withdrawals for personal expenditure, (d) the proper assessment of the parties’ non-financial contributions including the wife’s homemaker and parental responsibilities, (e) in terms of future needs, the true future income potential for each of the husband and wife, and (f) while no superannuation split is sought, whether the difference in superannuation balances should be taken into account as a discretionary adjustment in favour of the husband.   the proper assessment of the parties’ non-financial contributions including the wife’s homemaker and parental responsibilities, (e) in terms of future needs, the true future income potential for each of the husband and wife, and (f) while no superannuation split is sought, whether the difference in superannuation balances should be taken into account as a discretionary adjustment in favour of the husband.   in terms of future needs, the true future income potential for each of the husband and wife, and (f) while no superannuation split is sought, whether the difference in superannuation balances should be taken into account as a discretionary adjustment in favour of the husband.   while no superannuation split is sought, whether the difference in superannuation balances should be taken into account as a discretionary adjustment in favour of the husband.
issues relating to disclosure
“i believe that the conclusion of the house of lords in the case of livesey v jenkins is apposite, namely that in financial proceedings between spouses each party must make a full and frank disclosure of all material facts. in that case it was made clear that full and frank disclosure was required as a matter of principle in the light of the fact that it was the duty of the court, taking into account a number of designated criteria, to make a decision which basically involved the exercise of discretion. this is quite different from common law litigation between strangers, in which such a general duty does not exist, and obligations would only exist in so far as statute or court rules required. in my view it is fundamental to the whole operation of the family law act in financial cases that there is an obligation of the nature to which i have referred.”[18]
valuation of the wife’s business
lay evidence
counsel: yes. okay. so the situation is that you wouldn’t provide your daughter with a lease in the event that she said, “i want to sell”, to maximise the return for your daughter. you wouldn’t allow that lease process to move forward. is that right? mr k: no. it would only be short term gain. yes. not worth it. counsel: because the return to you is more important than the return to your daughter. is that your position? mr k: end game. yes. counsel: yes. yes. yet you’re a generous father, you say. i suggest to you that... mr k: yes. i am counsel: ...you’re not telling the truth? mr k: well, stick around and watch and it won’t be sold. i’m not selling it. like, i’ve got other stuff. why would i want to sell it? it’s just not... counsel: i’m not suggesting, sir, that you sell the property. i’m suggesting that you provide your daughter with a lease in the event that she wanted to sell the business? mr k: well, if you knew the property... counsel: and that would be of great assistance to your daughter if she wanted to sell? mr k: i don’t think so long-term. no.
expert valuation evidence
objections to expert qualifications
the wife’s expert mr g
the husband’s expert mr h
submissions of the parties
wife
husband
conclusion as to the value of the business
24.1 the determination of valuation issues “...is essentially a matter for the trial judge” (hull and hull (1983) flc 91-360 at 78,410). 24.2 the determination of valuation issues may be assisted by evidence of expert witnesses. the purpose of such evidence is to enable the trial judge to form his or her “...own independent judgment on the matter by the application of the appropriate principles” (lenehan and lenehan [1987] famca 8, (1987) flc 91-814 at 76,142). 24.3 a trial judge must satisfy himself or herself, by means of the application of proper principles, that he or she has arrived at an appropriate value. if that value “...happens to be different to the values ascribed to the relevant property by the valuers called in evidence, this in itself does not affect the validity of the judge’s finding...” provided that proper principles have been applied (borriello and borriello [1989] famca 48, (1989) flc 92-049 at 77,558). 24.4 the determination of the value of property involves a determination of the most appropriate method of valuation, which determination in turn depends on a number of factors. in the case of shares, those factors include “...the purpose for which the valuation is made, the nature of the shareholding, the character of the company’s business, its capacity to earn profits and the net value of its assets” (mallet and mallet [1984] hca 21, (1984) flc 91-507 per gibbs cj at 79,121). 24.5 it is the shareholding of the party, as opposed to the assets of the company, which must be valued (gamer and gamer [1988] famca 29, (1988) flc 91-932 at 76,743). 24.6 whilst the primary test is that of a hypothetical prudent purchaser (gamer and gamer [1988] famca 29, (1988) flc 91-932 at 76,743), it is the case that for the purposes of family law, “...the present commercial or capital value of shares in a proprietary company may not reflect their value to the spouse, who either has control after divorce, or who stands ultimately to benefit from them, or control them after the death of generous parents” (reynolds and reynolds [1984] famca 67, (1985) flc 91-632 at 80,111). 24.7 in proceedings under the family law act, “...the value to be ascribed to shares in a family company must be a realistic one, based upon the worth of the shares to the party himself or herself” (harrison and harrison (1996) flc 92-682 at 83,087, see also turnbull and turnbull and others (1991) flc 92-258 at 78,738).
the present commercial or capital value of shares in a proprietary company may not reflect their value to the spouse, who either has control after divorce or who stands ultimately to benefit from them or control them....
i am satisfied therefore in the context of proceedings under the family law act that when a judge is determining the value of shares held by party in a family company, he must look at the reality of the situation and value the shares on the basis of their worth to the shareholder. (underlining added)
“what a reasonable, prudent businessperson, in the position of the holder [husband or wife], willing but not anxious to exchange the asset for cash, and reasonably informed of the relevant facts, would see as the cash equivalent of the relevant asset to him/her”
add back of the “loan repayment”
wife’s evidence
evidence of mr k
“from about 1999, [ms gare] has borrowed funds from me for various purposes. she initially borrowed approximately $5,000 when she purchased her business, and about $25,000 when she purchased her first home in [suburb r]. she has also borrowed about $58,000 over the years for various living and business expenses. recently, she has borrowed approximately $32,000 from me for legal costs this year. [ms gare] has been paying me back over time when she is able to do so."
counsel: well, why isn’t that in your affidavit? [mr k]: well, she didn’t owe me any money, so i guess it wasn’t, sort of, that.... she had paid me. well, i guess it didn’t matter to me counsel: what do you mean it doesn’t matter? [mr k]: well, if it had been repaid, it had been repaid. so... counsel: well, if it had been repaid you would have signed an affidavit saying, “i have lent my daughter these sums of money” and omitted to acknowledge the fact that it had been repaid? [mr k]: well, it says that over the period of time i’ve loaned her money counsel: yes. what she says in her affidavit, sir, is that she paid you on 27 and 28 august a very substantial amount of money. do you recall that? 2018? [mr k]: i recall her paying me back some money in 2000 and something. yes. counsel: yes. how much was it? [mr k]: i would have to look in my records but, yes, i would say $110,000, $100,000. something like that. counsel: yes. you’ve seen that in her affidavit, haven’t you? [mr k]: over time i may have. i don’t know. counsel: but why wouldn’t you put that in your affidavit? it’s a very substantial amount of money. [mr k]: but why do i need to? i don’t need to – i don’t follow why i’ve got to, to be honest. but anyway counsel: it’s about telling the truth, sir, about what it is your daughter owes you or has repaid to you and i suggest to you that sum of $106,000 which was paid to you on 27 and 28 august is a very substantial amount of money? [mr k]: it is. it sure is.
“just verbally. i was in a bit of a bind with the property over in [suburb z] and i sold it and i had my business in it and then the deal fell through, so i had given myself a place with no job, but a fair few bills on it, because of the government charges and that, so, i don’t know, one day i just said to her, “well, i’m paying all this funding out in interest. if you’ve got any money, hand it back”, and she did it to help me out.”[61]
husband’s evidence
conclusion on the loan repayment issue
chattels retained by the husband
“the reason you are doing this is because you know that they’ve got some significant value and you want to avoid them being valued. you played for time. you bought months. by the time it came around there was no time to get a valuation. you it made it too difficult. that’s fair enough, isn’t it?”[71]
husband’s application for leave to rely upon earlier affidavit
9. these proceedings are listed for final hearing for four (4) days commencing at 10.00am on 14 february 2022. 10. not later than 4.00pm on 17 january 2022 the parties are to file and serve one trial affidavit and one trial affidavit of each witness including expert witnesses they intend to rely upon at trial, such affidavits to comply with part 8.3 federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021. 11. except as already provided by these orders, the parties will not be permitted to file any further affidavits and may not rely upon any past affidavits at the final hearing without the leave of the court. 12. not later than 4.00pm on 7 february 2022 each party file and serve an outline of case document. (emphasis added).
conclusion
chattels retained by the wife
loans from family members post-separation
expenditure on improvements to the business
conclusions as to the property pool
contributions
initial contributions
financial contributions during the relationship
non-financial contributions
conclusion on contributions
future needs
justice and equity
parenting introduction  from when should the children increase time with the father from three overnights per fortnight to five per fortnight, (b) whether the commencement of increased time should be conditional on the father obtaining his own residence and such residence having a separate bedroom for each child, (c) whether there should be a slower progression of time for y, (d) whether there should be an order made requiring the father to personally deliver the children to school not later than 30 minutes prior to commencement, (e) whether an order should be made requiring the parents to enrol y in counselling and, if so, the conditions which should pertain to that counselling, and (f) arrangements for school term holidays, long summer holidays and special occasions.   whether the commencement of increased time should be conditional on the father obtaining his own residence and such residence having a separate bedroom for each child, (c) whether there should be a slower progression of time for y, (d) whether there should be an order made requiring the father to personally deliver the children to school not later than 30 minutes prior to commencement, (e) whether an order should be made requiring the parents to enrol y in counselling and, if so, the conditions which should pertain to that counselling, and (f) arrangements for school term holidays, long summer holidays and special occasions.   whether there should be a slower progression of time for y, (d) whether there should be an order made requiring the father to personally deliver the children to school not later than 30 minutes prior to commencement, (e) whether an order should be made requiring the parents to enrol y in counselling and, if so, the conditions which should pertain to that counselling, and (f) arrangements for school term holidays, long summer holidays and special occasions.   whether there should be an order made requiring the father to personally deliver the children to school not later than 30 minutes prior to commencement, (e) whether an order should be made requiring the parents to enrol y in counselling and, if so, the conditions which should pertain to that counselling, and (f) arrangements for school term holidays, long summer holidays and special occasions.   whether an order should be made requiring the parents to enrol y in counselling and, if so, the conditions which should pertain to that counselling, and (f) arrangements for school term holidays, long summer holidays and special occasions.   arrangements for school term holidays, long summer holidays and special occasions.
relevant principles
relevant evidence
applicant mother  both children suffer asthma but they are otherwise generally in good health, (b) following the first parenting orders made after the father left the home, the children had a lot of difficulty adjusting to the new parenting arrangements, (c) y in particular struggled with being away from her mother for long periods and struggled with expressing her feelings to the father, (d) after the children commenced spending weekends with the father, there were difficulties with the children being able to get sufficient rest on a sunday night for them to be ready for school the next day. the mother contends that weekend arrangements took a particular toll on y who complained that she had trouble sleeping when she stayed at the father's home, (e) the children have expressed discomfort spending overnight time at the grandmother's house, again this concern having a greater impact on y than x, (f) she has observed the children to be tired and emotional due to changing homes and the beds in which they sleep, (g) the mother has observed a positive change in the father's parenting and the degree of his involvement with the children, (h) the mother has a preference for the current spend time arrangements and believes that the children have settled in well to the current regime, (i) the mother contends that the father is unable to take the children to school because of his work commitments. she is concerned that if he is required to take the children to school they will be required to wake very early to attend before-school care, (j) the mother believes that the childrens' relationship with their father will be improved if he has his own residence with a bedroom for each of them, (k) y's relationship with her father has not progressed at the same rate as x's. y still struggles with long periods away from home and often asks to come home during the father's time. the mother also gives a number of examples where y has been distressed by the father's behaviour and been reluctant to spend time with him, (l) the mother describes other occasions where she has observed the children becoming upset following spend time arrangements, including where x has become physically aggressive, (m) the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   following the first parenting orders made after the father left the home, the children had a lot of difficulty adjusting to the new parenting arrangements, (c) y in particular struggled with being away from her mother for long periods and struggled with expressing her feelings to the father, (d) after the children commenced spending weekends with the father, there were difficulties with the children being able to get sufficient rest on a sunday night for them to be ready for school the next day. the mother contends that weekend arrangements took a particular toll on y who complained that she had trouble sleeping when she stayed at the father's home, (e) the children have expressed discomfort spending overnight time at the grandmother's house, again this concern having a greater impact on y than x, (f) she has observed the children to be tired and emotional due to changing homes and the beds in which they sleep, (g) the mother has observed a positive change in the father's parenting and the degree of his involvement with the children, (h) the mother has a preference for the current spend time arrangements and believes that the children have settled in well to the current regime, (i) the mother contends that the father is unable to take the children to school because of his work commitments. she is concerned that if he is required to take the children to school they will be required to wake very early to attend before-school care, (j) the mother believes that the childrens' relationship with their father will be improved if he has his own residence with a bedroom for each of them, (k) y's relationship with her father has not progressed at the same rate as x's. y still struggles with long periods away from home and often asks to come home during the father's time. the mother also gives a number of examples where y has been distressed by the father's behaviour and been reluctant to spend time with him, (l) the mother describes other occasions where she has observed the children becoming upset following spend time arrangements, including where x has become physically aggressive, (m) the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   y in particular struggled with being away from her mother for long periods and struggled with expressing her feelings to the father, (d) after the children commenced spending weekends with the father, there were difficulties with the children being able to get sufficient rest on a sunday night for them to be ready for school the next day. the mother contends that weekend arrangements took a particular toll on y who complained that she had trouble sleeping when she stayed at the father's home, (e) the children have expressed discomfort spending overnight time at the grandmother's house, again this concern having a greater impact on y than x, (f) she has observed the children to be tired and emotional due to changing homes and the beds in which they sleep, (g) the mother has observed a positive change in the father's parenting and the degree of his involvement with the children, (h) the mother has a preference for the current spend time arrangements and believes that the children have settled in well to the current regime, (i) the mother contends that the father is unable to take the children to school because of his work commitments. she is concerned that if he is required to take the children to school they will be required to wake very early to attend before-school care, (j) the mother believes that the childrens' relationship with their father will be improved if he has his own residence with a bedroom for each of them, (k) y's relationship with her father has not progressed at the same rate as x's. y still struggles with long periods away from home and often asks to come home during the father's time. the mother also gives a number of examples where y has been distressed by the father's behaviour and been reluctant to spend time with him, (l) the mother describes other occasions where she has observed the children becoming upset following spend time arrangements, including where x has become physically aggressive, (m) the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   after the children commenced spending weekends with the father, there were difficulties with the children being able to get sufficient rest on a sunday night for them to be ready for school the next day. the mother contends that weekend arrangements took a particular toll on y who complained that she had trouble sleeping when she stayed at the father's home, (e) the children have expressed discomfort spending overnight time at the grandmother's house, again this concern having a greater impact on y than x, (f) she has observed the children to be tired and emotional due to changing homes and the beds in which they sleep, (g) the mother has observed a positive change in the father's parenting and the degree of his involvement with the children, (h) the mother has a preference for the current spend time arrangements and believes that the children have settled in well to the current regime, (i) the mother contends that the father is unable to take the children to school because of his work commitments. she is concerned that if he is required to take the children to school they will be required to wake very early to attend before-school care, (j) the mother believes that the childrens' relationship with their father will be improved if he has his own residence with a bedroom for each of them, (k) y's relationship with her father has not progressed at the same rate as x's. y still struggles with long periods away from home and often asks to come home during the father's time. the mother also gives a number of examples where y has been distressed by the father's behaviour and been reluctant to spend time with him, (l) the mother describes other occasions where she has observed the children becoming upset following spend time arrangements, including where x has become physically aggressive, (m) the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   the children have expressed discomfort spending overnight time at the grandmother's house, again this concern having a greater impact on y than x, (f) she has observed the children to be tired and emotional due to changing homes and the beds in which they sleep, (g) the mother has observed a positive change in the father's parenting and the degree of his involvement with the children, (h) the mother has a preference for the current spend time arrangements and believes that the children have settled in well to the current regime, (i) the mother contends that the father is unable to take the children to school because of his work commitments. she is concerned that if he is required to take the children to school they will be required to wake very early to attend before-school care, (j) the mother believes that the childrens' relationship with their father will be improved if he has his own residence with a bedroom for each of them, (k) y's relationship with her father has not progressed at the same rate as x's. y still struggles with long periods away from home and often asks to come home during the father's time. the mother also gives a number of examples where y has been distressed by the father's behaviour and been reluctant to spend time with him, (l) the mother describes other occasions where she has observed the children becoming upset following spend time arrangements, including where x has become physically aggressive, (m) the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   she has observed the children to be tired and emotional due to changing homes and the beds in which they sleep, (g) the mother has observed a positive change in the father's parenting and the degree of his involvement with the children, (h) the mother has a preference for the current spend time arrangements and believes that the children have settled in well to the current regime, (i) the mother contends that the father is unable to take the children to school because of his work commitments. she is concerned that if he is required to take the children to school they will be required to wake very early to attend before-school care, (j) the mother believes that the childrens' relationship with their father will be improved if he has his own residence with a bedroom for each of them, (k) y's relationship with her father has not progressed at the same rate as x's. y still struggles with long periods away from home and often asks to come home during the father's time. the mother also gives a number of examples where y has been distressed by the father's behaviour and been reluctant to spend time with him, (l) the mother describes other occasions where she has observed the children becoming upset following spend time arrangements, including where x has become physically aggressive, (m) the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   the mother has observed a positive change in the father's parenting and the degree of his involvement with the children, (h) the mother has a preference for the current spend time arrangements and believes that the children have settled in well to the current regime, (i) the mother contends that the father is unable to take the children to school because of his work commitments. she is concerned that if he is required to take the children to school they will be required to wake very early to attend before-school care, (j) the mother believes that the childrens' relationship with their father will be improved if he has his own residence with a bedroom for each of them, (k) y's relationship with her father has not progressed at the same rate as x's. y still struggles with long periods away from home and often asks to come home during the father's time. the mother also gives a number of examples where y has been distressed by the father's behaviour and been reluctant to spend time with him, (l) the mother describes other occasions where she has observed the children becoming upset following spend time arrangements, including where x has become physically aggressive, (m) the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   the mother has a preference for the current spend time arrangements and believes that the children have settled in well to the current regime, (i) the mother contends that the father is unable to take the children to school because of his work commitments. she is concerned that if he is required to take the children to school they will be required to wake very early to attend before-school care, (j) the mother believes that the childrens' relationship with their father will be improved if he has his own residence with a bedroom for each of them, (k) y's relationship with her father has not progressed at the same rate as x's. y still struggles with long periods away from home and often asks to come home during the father's time. the mother also gives a number of examples where y has been distressed by the father's behaviour and been reluctant to spend time with him, (l) the mother describes other occasions where she has observed the children becoming upset following spend time arrangements, including where x has become physically aggressive, (m) the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   the mother contends that the father is unable to take the children to school because of his work commitments. she is concerned that if he is required to take the children to school they will be required to wake very early to attend before-school care, (j) the mother believes that the childrens' relationship with their father will be improved if he has his own residence with a bedroom for each of them, (k) y's relationship with her father has not progressed at the same rate as x's. y still struggles with long periods away from home and often asks to come home during the father's time. the mother also gives a number of examples where y has been distressed by the father's behaviour and been reluctant to spend time with him, (l) the mother describes other occasions where she has observed the children becoming upset following spend time arrangements, including where x has become physically aggressive, (m) the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   the mother believes that the childrens' relationship with their father will be improved if he has his own residence with a bedroom for each of them, (k) y's relationship with her father has not progressed at the same rate as x's. y still struggles with long periods away from home and often asks to come home during the father's time. the mother also gives a number of examples where y has been distressed by the father's behaviour and been reluctant to spend time with him, (l) the mother describes other occasions where she has observed the children becoming upset following spend time arrangements, including where x has become physically aggressive, (m) the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   y's relationship with her father has not progressed at the same rate as x's. y still struggles with long periods away from home and often asks to come home during the father's time. the mother also gives a number of examples where y has been distressed by the father's behaviour and been reluctant to spend time with him, (l) the mother describes other occasions where she has observed the children becoming upset following spend time arrangements, including where x has become physically aggressive, (m) the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   the mother describes other occasions where she has observed the children becoming upset following spend time arrangements, including where x has become physically aggressive, (m) the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   the mother believes that the father has engaged in discussions with the children about parenting arrangements and court orders, (n) the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   the spend time regime under the current parenting orders on occasion results in the children spending consecutive weekends with the father. the father has rigidly adhered to the regime and not shown any flexibility in allowing adjustments which would allow the children to have a better balance in that time spent between homes, (o) there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   there have been particular difficulties encountered between the parents in relation to the management of spend time arrangements in respect of school holidays and the long summer break. the inability of the parents to reach agreement has had an adverse impact upon the children, (p) the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   the mother has expressed concerns regarding the father's use of language, his temper, his smoking and alcohol consumption. she says there are occasions where the children have been scared of him, (q) the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   the mother believes that the children's relationship with their father will be stronger and more meaningful if they are allowed to progress time spent with him at their own pace. that is particularly the case for y, and (r) with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.   with the consent of the husband, the mother had taken the children to counselling with a psychologist, ms v.
respondent father  the father's belief that the mother has consistently attempted to manipulate the children and damage the relationship between him and them. this includes speaking negatively about the father in the presence of the children and trying to cast him in a negative light, (b) that the mother has attempted to interfere in the father's relationship with the children, including by making unilateral decisions and not informing him of matters such as school absences, (c) a particular unilateral act on the part of the mother was to engage the children in psychological therapy with ms v, (d) the father has always acted amicably and sought to engage with the mother about parenting issues in a way which does not involve the children in conflict, (e) that spend time arrangements, which had been in place since january 2020, had progressed well and that the children enjoy spending time with the father, including at the paternal grandmother's home and on trips away, (f) the children each have their own room and privacy at the paternal grandmother's home, (g) the father reiterated the mother's evidence that difficulties had been encountered in reaching agreement about arrangements for the long school holiday period and that orders should be made to address any confusion, (h) the father agrees with the recommendations made by dr j regarding spend time arrangements, (i) the father believes that changeovers have caused difficulty for the mother in the past but he does not have an issue with contacting or communicating with the mother, and (j) going forward, it remains the father's intention to live close to the children's school. it is the father's hope once the proceedings are finalised and a division of matrimonial assets occurs that he can purchase a three-bedroom property in the area, which will provide the children with their own bedrooms and privacy.   that the mother has attempted to interfere in the father's relationship with the children, including by making unilateral decisions and not informing him of matters such as school absences, (c) a particular unilateral act on the part of the mother was to engage the children in psychological therapy with ms v, (d) the father has always acted amicably and sought to engage with the mother about parenting issues in a way which does not involve the children in conflict, (e) that spend time arrangements, which had been in place since january 2020, had progressed well and that the children enjoy spending time with the father, including at the paternal grandmother's home and on trips away, (f) the children each have their own room and privacy at the paternal grandmother's home, (g) the father reiterated the mother's evidence that difficulties had been encountered in reaching agreement about arrangements for the long school holiday period and that orders should be made to address any confusion, (h) the father agrees with the recommendations made by dr j regarding spend time arrangements, (i) the father believes that changeovers have caused difficulty for the mother in the past but he does not have an issue with contacting or communicating with the mother, and (j) going forward, it remains the father's intention to live close to the children's school. it is the father's hope once the proceedings are finalised and a division of matrimonial assets occurs that he can purchase a three-bedroom property in the area, which will provide the children with their own bedrooms and privacy.   a particular unilateral act on the part of the mother was to engage the children in psychological therapy with ms v, (d) the father has always acted amicably and sought to engage with the mother about parenting issues in a way which does not involve the children in conflict, (e) that spend time arrangements, which had been in place since january 2020, had progressed well and that the children enjoy spending time with the father, including at the paternal grandmother's home and on trips away, (f) the children each have their own room and privacy at the paternal grandmother's home, (g) the father reiterated the mother's evidence that difficulties had been encountered in reaching agreement about arrangements for the long school holiday period and that orders should be made to address any confusion, (h) the father agrees with the recommendations made by dr j regarding spend time arrangements, (i) the father believes that changeovers have caused difficulty for the mother in the past but he does not have an issue with contacting or communicating with the mother, and (j) going forward, it remains the father's intention to live close to the children's school. it is the father's hope once the proceedings are finalised and a division of matrimonial assets occurs that he can purchase a three-bedroom property in the area, which will provide the children with their own bedrooms and privacy.   the father has always acted amicably and sought to engage with the mother about parenting issues in a way which does not involve the children in conflict, (e) that spend time arrangements, which had been in place since january 2020, had progressed well and that the children enjoy spending time with the father, including at the paternal grandmother's home and on trips away, (f) the children each have their own room and privacy at the paternal grandmother's home, (g) the father reiterated the mother's evidence that difficulties had been encountered in reaching agreement about arrangements for the long school holiday period and that orders should be made to address any confusion, (h) the father agrees with the recommendations made by dr j regarding spend time arrangements, (i) the father believes that changeovers have caused difficulty for the mother in the past but he does not have an issue with contacting or communicating with the mother, and (j) going forward, it remains the father's intention to live close to the children's school. it is the father's hope once the proceedings are finalised and a division of matrimonial assets occurs that he can purchase a three-bedroom property in the area, which will provide the children with their own bedrooms and privacy.   that spend time arrangements, which had been in place since january 2020, had progressed well and that the children enjoy spending time with the father, including at the paternal grandmother's home and on trips away, (f) the children each have their own room and privacy at the paternal grandmother's home, (g) the father reiterated the mother's evidence that difficulties had been encountered in reaching agreement about arrangements for the long school holiday period and that orders should be made to address any confusion, (h) the father agrees with the recommendations made by dr j regarding spend time arrangements, (i) the father believes that changeovers have caused difficulty for the mother in the past but he does not have an issue with contacting or communicating with the mother, and (j) going forward, it remains the father's intention to live close to the children's school. it is the father's hope once the proceedings are finalised and a division of matrimonial assets occurs that he can purchase a three-bedroom property in the area, which will provide the children with their own bedrooms and privacy.   the children each have their own room and privacy at the paternal grandmother's home, (g) the father reiterated the mother's evidence that difficulties had been encountered in reaching agreement about arrangements for the long school holiday period and that orders should be made to address any confusion, (h) the father agrees with the recommendations made by dr j regarding spend time arrangements, (i) the father believes that changeovers have caused difficulty for the mother in the past but he does not have an issue with contacting or communicating with the mother, and (j) going forward, it remains the father's intention to live close to the children's school. it is the father's hope once the proceedings are finalised and a division of matrimonial assets occurs that he can purchase a three-bedroom property in the area, which will provide the children with their own bedrooms and privacy.   the father reiterated the mother's evidence that difficulties had been encountered in reaching agreement about arrangements for the long school holiday period and that orders should be made to address any confusion, (h) the father agrees with the recommendations made by dr j regarding spend time arrangements, (i) the father believes that changeovers have caused difficulty for the mother in the past but he does not have an issue with contacting or communicating with the mother, and (j) going forward, it remains the father's intention to live close to the children's school. it is the father's hope once the proceedings are finalised and a division of matrimonial assets occurs that he can purchase a three-bedroom property in the area, which will provide the children with their own bedrooms and privacy.   the father agrees with the recommendations made by dr j regarding spend time arrangements, (i) the father believes that changeovers have caused difficulty for the mother in the past but he does not have an issue with contacting or communicating with the mother, and (j) going forward, it remains the father's intention to live close to the children's school. it is the father's hope once the proceedings are finalised and a division of matrimonial assets occurs that he can purchase a three-bedroom property in the area, which will provide the children with their own bedrooms and privacy.   the father believes that changeovers have caused difficulty for the mother in the past but he does not have an issue with contacting or communicating with the mother, and (j) going forward, it remains the father's intention to live close to the children's school. it is the father's hope once the proceedings are finalised and a division of matrimonial assets occurs that he can purchase a three-bedroom property in the area, which will provide the children with their own bedrooms and privacy.   going forward, it remains the father's intention to live close to the children's school. it is the father's hope once the proceedings are finalised and a division of matrimonial assets occurs that he can purchase a three-bedroom property in the area, which will provide the children with their own bedrooms and privacy.
dr j
cross examination by the applicant mother
cross-examination by the respondent husband
consideration of the statutory requirements
parental responsibility
primary considerations
additional considerations
views of the children s.60cc(3)(a)
nature of the relationship of the children with each of the parents and other persons s.60cc(3)(b)
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues, to spend time with the children and communicate with them s.60cc(3)(c)
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the obligations to maintain the children s.60cc(3)(ca)
the likely effect of any change to the children's circumstances including the likely effect on the children of any separation from either of his/her parents or any other party (including any grandparent or relative of the child) with whom he/she has been living s. 60cc(3)(d)
the practical difficulty and expense of the children spending time and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty of expense will substantially affect the children's right to maintain personal relationships and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis s 60cc(3)(e)
the capacity of each of the parents and any other person to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs s.60cc(3)(f) and the parents attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood s.60cc(3)(i)
whether it will be preferable to make the order that will be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children s.60cc(3)(l)?
resolution of the outstanding issues.  in week 1, from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) thursday until the commencement of school friday (or 9.00am if a non-school day), and (b) in week 2, from the conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non-school day) until the commencement of school monday (or 9.00am if a non-school day).   in week 2, from the conclusion of school thursday (or 3.30pm on a non-school day) until the commencement of school monday (or 9.00am if a non-school day).
from when should the children spend increased time with the father from three overnights per fortnight to five per fortnight?
whether the commencement of increased time should be conditional on the father obtaining his own residence and such residence having a separate bedroom for each child?
should there be a slower progression of time for y?
whether there should be an order made requiring the father to personally deliver the children to school not later than 30 minutes prior to commencement?
whether an order should be made requiring the parents to enrol y in counselling and, if so, the conditions which should pertain to that counselling?
arrangements for school term holidays
arrangements for long summer holidays
arrangements for special occasions
costs
associate: dated: 17 february 2023
dated: 17 february 2023
[1] stanford & stanford (2012) 247 clr 108[2] affidavit of ms gare filed 13 september 2021, para 117[3] affidavit of ms gare filed 13 september 2021, para 124[4] annexure “-1” of mr g’s affidavit filed 17 january 2022, court book (‘cb’), p 127[5] spencer v the commonwealth of australia (1907) hca 82, 5 clr 418[6] annexure “-2” of mr h’s affidavit sworn 25 january 2022[7] warne & warne [1982] famca 33, (1982) 8 fam lr 388 at 389 (per simpson j, strauss and hase jj agreeing), also see ajo & gro [2005] famcafc 104, (2005) 33 fam lr 134 at 142 (per holden, warnick and le poer trench jj)[8] see e.g. lee steere & lee steere [1985] famca 57 regarding the inclusion of a farming business and properties[9] per company w valuation as at january 2022[10] per company w as at january 2022[11] per valuation of mr g filed 17 january 2022[12] per valuation of mr h dated 6 december 2021 “value to owner”[13] per valuation of mr h dated 11 february 2022 “fair market value”[14] accepting “value to owner’ valuation of business[15] accepting “fair market value” valuation[16] rule 6.06 of the federal circuit and family court of australia rules 2021 and rule 24.03 of the predecessor rules[17] guinti and giunti [1986] famca 15, (1986) 11 fam lr 160 at 165, [1986] famca 15, [1986] flc 91-759 at 75,555[18] in the marriage of briese [1985] famca 23, (1986) flc 91-713 at 75,181[19] see e.g. black & kellner [1992] famca 2, (1992) 15 fam lr 343 at 347-348[20] weir & weir [1992] famca 69, (1993) flc 92-338, (1992) 16 fam lr 154[21] transcript of 15 february 2022, p 95[22] affidavit of mr k sworn 26 september 2020, para 20[23] transcript of 15 february 2022, p 140[24] transcript of 15 february 2022, p 140[25] evidence act 1995 (cth), s 79
[26] dasreef pty ltd v hawchar [2011] hca 21 at [90]
[27] cb, p 144[28] transcript of 15 february 2022, p 151[29] transcript of 16 february 2022, p 2[30] transcript of 16 february 2022, p 10[31] transcript of 16 february 2022, p 18-19[32] transcript of 16 february 2022, p 20[33] cb, p 491[34] cb, p 510[35] (see table 2 – adjusted company accounts (peditba) and table 3 – adjustment commentary)[36] westpac business one account ending in #...04[37] transcript of 17 february 2023, p 141[38] transcript of 17 february 2022, p 137[39] transcript of 17 february 2022, p 141[40] transcript of 17 february 2022, p 148[41] transcript of 17 february 2022, p 153-154 [42] wilde & wilde [2007] famca 1044 citing chick & chick [1987] famca 69[43] in the marriage of antmann [1980] famca 64; in the marriage of kelly (no, 2) [1981] famca 78[44] family law (7th ed), riethmuller & smith, lawbook co. 2022[45] reynolds and reynolds [1977] 2 nswlr 295; harrison and harrison [1996] famca 12; in the marriage of hull [1983] famca 23[46] scott & scott (2006) famca 1379 at [45][47] see e.g. harrison & harrison (1996) flc 92-682[48] vella, t. 2009, value to the owner in the context of family law forensic accounting practice icaa forensic accounting conference, melbourne; see also fargher, i. 2018, the ‘value to the owner’ objective and its implications in the separate recognition of personal and enterprise goodwill aabfj, new south wales[49] see also wender & wender [2017] famcafc 48 at [68][50] trial affidavit of ms gare dated 24 january 2022, para 128-132[51] transcript of 14 february 2022, p 54[52] transcript of 14 february 2022, p 64[53] transcript of 15 february 2022, p 86; annexure “-8” of mr farlow’s trial affidavit affirmed 4 february 2022[54] affidavit of mr k sworn 26 september 2020, para 12-13[55] transcript of 15 february 2022, p 133[56] affidavit of mr k sworn 26 september 2020, para 12[57] transcript of 15 february 2022, p 133[58] transcript of 15 february 2022, p 134[59] ibid[60] transcript of 15 february 2022, paragraphs 134-135[61] transcript of 15 february 2022, p 143[62] transcript of 17 february 2022, p 109[63] c & c [1998] famca 143 at [46][64] vass & vass [2015] famcafc 51 [65] calverley v green [1984] hca 81; (1984) 155 clr 242[66] transcript of 14 february 2022, p 72[67] transcript of 15 february 2022, p 89[68] annexure “-9” of mr farlow’s trial affidavit affirmed 4 february 2022; exhibit r2[69] annexure “-6” of ms gare’s trial affidavit dated 24 january 2022[70] trial affidavit of mr farlow affirmed 4 february 2022, para 116[71] transcript of 16 february 2022, p 72[72] transcript of 17 february 2022, p 104[73] exhibit a4[74] exhibit a5[75] exhibit a8[76] cb, p 18[77] cb, p 184[78] central practice direction, federal circuit and family court of australia, p 5[79] trial affidavit of ms gare dated 24 january 2022, para 133[80] omitting items of minor or unknown value[81] chapman & chapman [2014] famcafc 91 at [101][82] dickons & dickons [2012] famcafc 154[83] trial affidavit of mr farlow affirmed 4 february 2022, para 122[84] trial affidavit of mr farlow affirmed 4 february 2022, para 123-125[85] wallis & manning [2017] famcafc 14[86] fields & smith [2015] famcafc 57[87] transcript of 16 february 2022, p 26[88] cb, p 849; annexure “-1” to dr j’s affidavit affirmed on 30 january 2022[89] cb, p 878; annexure “-2” to dr j’s affidavit affirmed on 30 january 2022[90] family report dated 25 november 2021, p 11 [91] transcript of 16 february 2022, p 84[92] transcript of 16 february 2022, p 85[93] transcript of 16 february 2022, p 87[94] s 60cc(2)(a) family law act 1975 (cth)[95] s 60cc(2)(b) family law act 1975 (cth)