last updated: 18 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
whalan & rapallo [2023] fedcfamc2f 133
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  the father will contact the mother in writing regarding the issue and will provide his views about the issue, (b) if the mother wishes to comment on the father’s proposal she shall do so in writing within 7 days, (c) the parties will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about the issue, and (d) if no agreement is reached between the parties within 7 days of the father contacting the mother pursuant to (a) to (b) above, the father will make the final decision about the issue and advise the mother in writing of the decision made.   if the mother wishes to comment on the father’s proposal she shall do so in writing within 7 days, (c) the parties will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about the issue, and (d) if no agreement is reached between the parties within 7 days of the father contacting the mother pursuant to (a) to (b) above, the father will make the final decision about the issue and advise the mother in writing of the decision made.   the parties will make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about the issue, and (d) if no agreement is reached between the parties within 7 days of the father contacting the mother pursuant to (a) to (b) above, the father will make the final decision about the issue and advise the mother in writing of the decision made.   if no agreement is reached between the parties within 7 days of the father contacting the mother pursuant to (a) to (b) above, the father will make the final decision about the issue and advise the mother in writing of the decision made.
living arrangements  each alternate friday from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am if a non-school day), and (b) on such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.   on such other times that may be agreed between the parties in writing.
special occasions  for christmas: (i) in even numbered years, with the mother from 12pm on 24 december to 4pm on 25 december and with the father from 4pm on 25 december to 10am on 27 december, and (ii) in odd numbered years, with the father from 12pm on 24 december to 4pm on 25 december and with the mother from 4pm on 25 december to 10am on 27 december, (b) until 2025 for easter: (i) in even numbered years, with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm on easter sunday, and with the father from 2pm on easter sunday to 10am the following tuesday, and (ii) in odd numbered years, with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm on easter sunday, and with the mother from 2pm on easter sunday to 10am the following tuesday. (c) commencing from 2026 for easter: (i) in even numbered years with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm the following tuesday, and (ii) in odd numbered years with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm the following tuesday. (d) for mother’s/father’s day: (i) with the mother from 5pm on the day prior to mother’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am if a non-school day), and (ii) with the father from 5pm on the day prior to father’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am if a non-school day). (e) the child spend time with each parent on his birthday if he is not already in that parent’s care as follows: (i) if the child’s birthday falls on a school day, then from after school (or 3.30pm) until 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner, and (ii) if the child’s birthday falls on a non-school day, then from 2.30pm to 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner, (f) the child spend time with each parent on the parent’s birthday from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) the day before the parent’s birthday until the commencement of school (or 9am if a non-school day) on the day following the parent’s birthday.   in even numbered years, with the mother from 12pm on 24 december to 4pm on 25 december and with the father from 4pm on 25 december to 10am on 27 december, and (ii) in odd numbered years, with the father from 12pm on 24 december to 4pm on 25 december and with the mother from 4pm on 25 december to 10am on 27 december,  ) in odd numbered years, with the father from 12pm on 24 december to 4pm on 25 december and with the mother from 4pm on 25 december to 10am on 27 december,   until 2025 for easter: (i) in even numbered years, with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm on easter sunday, and with the father from 2pm on easter sunday to 10am the following tuesday, and (ii) in odd numbered years, with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm on easter sunday, and with the mother from 2pm on easter sunday to 10am the following tuesday. (c) commencing from 2026 for easter: (i) in even numbered years with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm the following tuesday, and (ii) in odd numbered years with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm the following tuesday. (d) for mother’s/father’s day: (i) with the mother from 5pm on the day prior to mother’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am if a non-school day), and (ii) with the father from 5pm on the day prior to father’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am if a non-school day). (e) the child spend time with each parent on his birthday if he is not already in that parent’s care as follows: (i) if the child’s birthday falls on a school day, then from after school (or 3.30pm) until 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner, and (ii) if the child’s birthday falls on a non-school day, then from 2.30pm to 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner, (f) the child spend time with each parent on the parent’s birthday from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) the day before the parent’s birthday until the commencement of school (or 9am if a non-school day) on the day following the parent’s birthday.   in even numbered years, with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm on easter sunday, and with the father from 2pm on easter sunday to 10am the following tuesday, and (ii) in odd numbered years, with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm on easter sunday, and with the mother from 2pm on easter sunday to 10am the following tuesday.  ) in odd numbered years, with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm on easter sunday, and with the mother from 2pm on easter sunday to 10am the following tuesday.   commencing from 2026 for easter: (i) in even numbered years with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm the following tuesday, and (ii) in odd numbered years with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm the following tuesday. (d) for mother’s/father’s day: (i) with the mother from 5pm on the day prior to mother’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am if a non-school day), and (ii) with the father from 5pm on the day prior to father’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am if a non-school day). (e) the child spend time with each parent on his birthday if he is not already in that parent’s care as follows: (i) if the child’s birthday falls on a school day, then from after school (or 3.30pm) until 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner, and (ii) if the child’s birthday falls on a non-school day, then from 2.30pm to 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner, (f) the child spend time with each parent on the parent’s birthday from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) the day before the parent’s birthday until the commencement of school (or 9am if a non-school day) on the day following the parent’s birthday.   in even numbered years with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm the following tuesday, and (ii) in odd numbered years with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm the following tuesday.  ) in odd numbered years with the father from the conclusion of school (or 3.30pm if a non-school day) on holy thursday to 2pm the following tuesday.   for mother’s/father’s day: (i) with the mother from 5pm on the day prior to mother’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am if a non-school day), and (ii) with the father from 5pm on the day prior to father’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am if a non-school day). (e) the child spend time with each parent on his birthday if he is not already in that parent’s care as follows: (i) if the child’s birthday falls on a school day, then from after school (or 3.30pm) until 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner, and (ii) if the child’s birthday falls on a non-school day, then from 2.30pm to 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner, (f) the child spend time with each parent on the parent’s birthday from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) the day before the parent’s birthday until the commencement of school (or 9am if a non-school day) on the day following the parent’s birthday.   with the mother from 5pm on the day prior to mother’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am if a non-school day), and (ii) with the father from 5pm on the day prior to father’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am if a non-school day).  ) with the father from 5pm on the day prior to father’s day until the commencement of school on monday (or 9am if a non-school day).   the child spend time with each parent on his birthday if he is not already in that parent’s care as follows: (i) if the child’s birthday falls on a school day, then from after school (or 3.30pm) until 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner, and (ii) if the child’s birthday falls on a non-school day, then from 2.30pm to 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner, (f) the child spend time with each parent on the parent’s birthday from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) the day before the parent’s birthday until the commencement of school (or 9am if a non-school day) on the day following the parent’s birthday.   if the child’s birthday falls on a school day, then from after school (or 3.30pm) until 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner, and (ii) if the child’s birthday falls on a non-school day, then from 2.30pm to 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner,  ) if the child’s birthday falls on a non-school day, then from 2.30pm to 7.30pm with the parent who has the care of x during this time to feed x dinner,   the child spend time with each parent on the parent’s birthday from the conclusion of school (or 3:30pm if a non-school day) the day before the parent’s birthday until the commencement of school (or 9am if a non-school day) on the day following the parent’s birthday.
changeovers
education  be listed as the primary emergency contact on the enrolment forms for the child’s school, (b) communicate with the child’s school and request copies at their own expense of notices, reports, newsletters, photographs and similar correspondence usually provided to parents, and (c) attend all of the child’s school functions including concerts, plays, fetes and sporting activities usually attended by parents.   communicate with the child’s school and request copies at their own expense of notices, reports, newsletters, photographs and similar correspondence usually provided to parents, and (c) attend all of the child’s school functions including concerts, plays, fetes and sporting activities usually attended by parents.   attend all of the child’s school functions including concerts, plays, fetes and sporting activities usually attended by parents.   to first contact the parent in whose care the child is pursuant to these orders in the event of an emergency, (b) to provide both parents with all information pertaining to the child, and (c) these orders shall be evidence of any authorisation required.   to provide both parents with all information pertaining to the child, and (c) these orders shall be evidence of any authorisation required.   these orders shall be evidence of any authorisation required.
facetime/telephone  at such times requested by the child, and (b) the parent who has the care of the child to facilitate contact to the other parent’s mobile.   the parent who has the care of the child to facilitate contact to the other parent’s mobile.   providing a handover summary of the child following time with the child including an outline of information relating to the child’s health, school, behaviour and social activities, (b) communicating all matters relating to the care, welfare and development of the child, (c) any proposed variation to these orders, and (d) to implement a joint calendar regarding the child’s time with each parent and any other commitments and activities,   communicating all matters relating to the care, welfare and development of the child, (c) any proposed variation to these orders, and (d) to implement a joint calendar regarding the child’s time with each parent and any other commitments and activities,   any proposed variation to these orders, and (d) to implement a joint calendar regarding the child’s time with each parent and any other commitments and activities,   to implement a joint calendar regarding the child’s time with each parent and any other commitments and activities,
save that the parents shall communicate by text message or telephone in the case of an emergency or if the app is not accessible.
medical treatment  causing the child to attend upon a specialist, psychologist, counsellor or like allied health practitioner (save for his neurologist at the b hospital) without the express written consent of the father, and (b) taking the child to any other medical centre save for c medical clinic or such other medical centre as may be nominated by the father in writing, save in the event of an emergency.   taking the child to any other medical centre save for c medical clinic or such other medical centre as may be nominated by the father in writing, save in the event of an emergency.   within 2 hours notify the other in writing in the event the child attends upon any medical practitioner with details of diagnosis and any treatment prescribed, (b) be at liberty to attend all specialist appointments, (c) be authorised to communicate with and obtain information from any medical or allied health professional the child attends upon including but not limited to the child’s medical file, referrals, correspondence from the either parent, and any other like information, and (d) these orders shall be evidence of any authorisation required.   be at liberty to attend all specialist appointments, (c) be authorised to communicate with and obtain information from any medical or allied health professional the child attends upon including but not limited to the child’s medical file, referrals, correspondence from the either parent, and any other like information, and (d) these orders shall be evidence of any authorisation required.   be authorised to communicate with and obtain information from any medical or allied health professional the child attends upon including but not limited to the child’s medical file, referrals, correspondence from the either parent, and any other like information, and (d) these orders shall be evidence of any authorisation required.   these orders shall be evidence of any authorisation required.
restraints  abusing, insulting, belittling or otherwise denigrating the other party, their partner or family in the presence or hearing of the child and from allowing anyone else to do so, (b) discussing these proceedings, adult matters or exposing the child to parental conflict within the presence or hearing of the child or allowing anyone else to do so, (c) exposing the child to all forms of family violence or allowing anyone else to do so, and (d) speaking disparagingly about the other parent at the child’s school and extra curricular activities.   discussing these proceedings, adult matters or exposing the child to parental conflict within the presence or hearing of the child or allowing anyone else to do so, (c) exposing the child to all forms of family violence or allowing anyone else to do so, and (d) speaking disparagingly about the other parent at the child’s school and extra curricular activities.   exposing the child to all forms of family violence or allowing anyone else to do so, and (d) speaking disparagingly about the other parent at the child’s school and extra curricular activities.   speaking disparagingly about the other parent at the child’s school and extra curricular activities.
travel  for interstate travel, the travelling parent provides the non-travelling parent with 7 days prior notice of their intention to travel, (b) for overseas travel: (i) the travelling parent provides the non-travelling parent with 60 days written notice of their intention to travel, (ii) one month prior to travel, the travelling parent provides the non-travelling parent with the following: copy of the itinerary, copy of airline tickets, evidence of travel medical insurance obtained at their sole expense, and the address at which the child shall be residing and a contact telephone number on which the travelling parent can be contacted. (iii) the travelling parent will facilitate the other parent having reasonable telephone/skype/email communication with the child whilst they are away.   for overseas travel: (i) the travelling parent provides the non-travelling parent with 60 days written notice of their intention to travel, (ii) one month prior to travel, the travelling parent provides the non-travelling parent with the following: copy of the itinerary, copy of airline tickets, evidence of travel medical insurance obtained at their sole expense, and the address at which the child shall be residing and a contact telephone number on which the travelling parent can be contacted. (iii) the travelling parent will facilitate the other parent having reasonable telephone/skype/email communication with the child whilst they are away.   the travelling parent provides the non-travelling parent with 60 days written notice of their intention to travel, (ii) one month prior to travel, the travelling parent provides the non-travelling parent with the following: copy of the itinerary, copy of airline tickets, evidence of travel medical insurance obtained at their sole expense, and the address at which the child shall be residing and a contact telephone number on which the travelling parent can be contacted. (iii) the travelling parent will facilitate the other parent having reasonable telephone/skype/email communication with the child whilst they are away.  ) one month prior to travel, the travelling parent provides the non-travelling parent with the following: copy of the itinerary, copy of airline tickets, evidence of travel medical insurance obtained at their sole expense, and the address at which the child shall be residing and a contact telephone number on which the travelling parent can be contacted. (iii) the travelling parent will facilitate the other parent having reasonable telephone/skype/email communication with the child whilst they are away.  i) the travelling parent will facilitate the other parent having reasonable telephone/skype/email communication with the child whilst they are away.   the father provide the mother with 30 days prior notice of his intention to take the extended holiday with the child, (b) the extended holiday must not interfere with the mother’s time with the children during the christmas period pursuant to order 8(a) herein, and (c) the father shall facilitate make up time between the mother and the child for any time interrupted by the extended holiday at times to be agreed between the parties in writing in the two months prior to and/or following the extended holiday.   the extended holiday must not interfere with the mother’s time with the children during the christmas period pursuant to order 8(a) herein, and (c) the father shall facilitate make up time between the mother and the child for any time interrupted by the extended holiday at times to be agreed between the parties in writing in the two months prior to and/or following the extended holiday.   the father shall facilitate make up time between the mother and the child for any time interrupted by the extended holiday at times to be agreed between the parties in writing in the two months prior to and/or following the extended holiday.
further orders
reasons for judgment
judge glass:
credibility
there are three possibilities regarding [ms rapallo]’s allegations, namely that [mr whalan] has stalked the mother (for reasons unknown, particularly considering he is the respondent in these proceedings), that [ms rapallo] has knowingly contrived the allegations for strategic advantage, or that the mother presents with a delusional disorder (or some other psychopathology).[6]   in march 2022, ms rapallo deposed that the magistrates court did not accept her signature to revoke an interim intervention order in february 2022. so much is inconsistent with the transcript of proceedings on that occasion. she accepted in oral evidence that her written evidence was misleading. (b) ms rapallo disputed the assertion that she had taken x to the police station with her a number of times when reporting breaches of intervention orders. she later admitted taking x to the police station on 1 september 2019 to report such a breach, before finally conceding that she had taken him twice. (c) ms rapallo was asked how many applications for intervention orders she had made. she initially said twice. when she was asked whether she was sure, she paused for a moment, and said “three times”. in fact, she has made four such applications and one application to extend an order. (d) ms rapallo was asked how many times she had sought to report mr whalan for breaches of the intervention orders, she said “three times”. annexed to her own affidavit are five police statements in her name alleging breaches of the intervention orders. i will return to one of those statements about which ms rapallo made the extraordinary allegations both that someone prepared it on her behalf and that someone broke into her house and planted it there. (e) ms rapallo denied that she had said x told her all the time that his father said he wants his mother dead. she gave evidence that x told her that three to four times since april 2021 when he said it for the first time. inconsistently, she subsequently maintained the accuracy of her evidence that mr whalan continuously tells x he wants to see his mum dead. when it was put to her that she was either lying or intended that “continuously” meant four times in two years, she was non-responsive, stating “i can’t assess that.” (f) ms rapallo did not facilitate x’s time with his father on the weekend of 30 april 2020. she initially asserted that it was her weekend. she accepted that she did not suggest to mr whalan that he had mixed up the weekends. she did not challenge mr whalan’s evidence to the contrary. when it was suggested to her that she had told a lie, she paused for an extended period before giving evidence “i don’t believe it was”. (g) ms rapallo initially claimed to have told mr whalan about x’s attendance upon a psychologist in 2022 after his first session with the psychologist. ms rapallo accepted that such a communication should be recorded in the parenting application then used by the parties. she then accepted that it was not there. when asked why not, she gave evidence “i didn’t send it.”   ms rapallo disputed the assertion that she had taken x to the police station with her a number of times when reporting breaches of intervention orders. she later admitted taking x to the police station on 1 september 2019 to report such a breach, before finally conceding that she had taken him twice. (c) ms rapallo was asked how many applications for intervention orders she had made. she initially said twice. when she was asked whether she was sure, she paused for a moment, and said “three times”. in fact, she has made four such applications and one application to extend an order. (d) ms rapallo was asked how many times she had sought to report mr whalan for breaches of the intervention orders, she said “three times”. annexed to her own affidavit are five police statements in her name alleging breaches of the intervention orders. i will return to one of those statements about which ms rapallo made the extraordinary allegations both that someone prepared it on her behalf and that someone broke into her house and planted it there. (e) ms rapallo denied that she had said x told her all the time that his father said he wants his mother dead. she gave evidence that x told her that three to four times since april 2021 when he said it for the first time. inconsistently, she subsequently maintained the accuracy of her evidence that mr whalan continuously tells x he wants to see his mum dead. when it was put to her that she was either lying or intended that “continuously” meant four times in two years, she was non-responsive, stating “i can’t assess that.” (f) ms rapallo did not facilitate x’s time with his father on the weekend of 30 april 2020. she initially asserted that it was her weekend. she accepted that she did not suggest to mr whalan that he had mixed up the weekends. she did not challenge mr whalan’s evidence to the contrary. when it was suggested to her that she had told a lie, she paused for an extended period before giving evidence “i don’t believe it was”. (g) ms rapallo initially claimed to have told mr whalan about x’s attendance upon a psychologist in 2022 after his first session with the psychologist. ms rapallo accepted that such a communication should be recorded in the parenting application then used by the parties. she then accepted that it was not there. when asked why not, she gave evidence “i didn’t send it.”   ms rapallo was asked how many applications for intervention orders she had made. she initially said twice. when she was asked whether she was sure, she paused for a moment, and said “three times”. in fact, she has made four such applications and one application to extend an order. (d) ms rapallo was asked how many times she had sought to report mr whalan for breaches of the intervention orders, she said “three times”. annexed to her own affidavit are five police statements in her name alleging breaches of the intervention orders. i will return to one of those statements about which ms rapallo made the extraordinary allegations both that someone prepared it on her behalf and that someone broke into her house and planted it there. (e) ms rapallo denied that she had said x told her all the time that his father said he wants his mother dead. she gave evidence that x told her that three to four times since april 2021 when he said it for the first time. inconsistently, she subsequently maintained the accuracy of her evidence that mr whalan continuously tells x he wants to see his mum dead. when it was put to her that she was either lying or intended that “continuously” meant four times in two years, she was non-responsive, stating “i can’t assess that.” (f) ms rapallo did not facilitate x’s time with his father on the weekend of 30 april 2020. she initially asserted that it was her weekend. she accepted that she did not suggest to mr whalan that he had mixed up the weekends. she did not challenge mr whalan’s evidence to the contrary. when it was suggested to her that she had told a lie, she paused for an extended period before giving evidence “i don’t believe it was”. (g) ms rapallo initially claimed to have told mr whalan about x’s attendance upon a psychologist in 2022 after his first session with the psychologist. ms rapallo accepted that such a communication should be recorded in the parenting application then used by the parties. she then accepted that it was not there. when asked why not, she gave evidence “i didn’t send it.”   ms rapallo was asked how many times she had sought to report mr whalan for breaches of the intervention orders, she said “three times”. annexed to her own affidavit are five police statements in her name alleging breaches of the intervention orders. i will return to one of those statements about which ms rapallo made the extraordinary allegations both that someone prepared it on her behalf and that someone broke into her house and planted it there. (e) ms rapallo denied that she had said x told her all the time that his father said he wants his mother dead. she gave evidence that x told her that three to four times since april 2021 when he said it for the first time. inconsistently, she subsequently maintained the accuracy of her evidence that mr whalan continuously tells x he wants to see his mum dead. when it was put to her that she was either lying or intended that “continuously” meant four times in two years, she was non-responsive, stating “i can’t assess that.” (f) ms rapallo did not facilitate x’s time with his father on the weekend of 30 april 2020. she initially asserted that it was her weekend. she accepted that she did not suggest to mr whalan that he had mixed up the weekends. she did not challenge mr whalan’s evidence to the contrary. when it was suggested to her that she had told a lie, she paused for an extended period before giving evidence “i don’t believe it was”. (g) ms rapallo initially claimed to have told mr whalan about x’s attendance upon a psychologist in 2022 after his first session with the psychologist. ms rapallo accepted that such a communication should be recorded in the parenting application then used by the parties. she then accepted that it was not there. when asked why not, she gave evidence “i didn’t send it.”   ms rapallo denied that she had said x told her all the time that his father said he wants his mother dead. she gave evidence that x told her that three to four times since april 2021 when he said it for the first time. inconsistently, she subsequently maintained the accuracy of her evidence that mr whalan continuously tells x he wants to see his mum dead. when it was put to her that she was either lying or intended that “continuously” meant four times in two years, she was non-responsive, stating “i can’t assess that.” (f) ms rapallo did not facilitate x’s time with his father on the weekend of 30 april 2020. she initially asserted that it was her weekend. she accepted that she did not suggest to mr whalan that he had mixed up the weekends. she did not challenge mr whalan’s evidence to the contrary. when it was suggested to her that she had told a lie, she paused for an extended period before giving evidence “i don’t believe it was”. (g) ms rapallo initially claimed to have told mr whalan about x’s attendance upon a psychologist in 2022 after his first session with the psychologist. ms rapallo accepted that such a communication should be recorded in the parenting application then used by the parties. she then accepted that it was not there. when asked why not, she gave evidence “i didn’t send it.”   ms rapallo did not facilitate x’s time with his father on the weekend of 30 april 2020. she initially asserted that it was her weekend. she accepted that she did not suggest to mr whalan that he had mixed up the weekends. she did not challenge mr whalan’s evidence to the contrary. when it was suggested to her that she had told a lie, she paused for an extended period before giving evidence “i don’t believe it was”. (g) ms rapallo initially claimed to have told mr whalan about x’s attendance upon a psychologist in 2022 after his first session with the psychologist. ms rapallo accepted that such a communication should be recorded in the parenting application then used by the parties. she then accepted that it was not there. when asked why not, she gave evidence “i didn’t send it.”   ms rapallo initially claimed to have told mr whalan about x’s attendance upon a psychologist in 2022 after his first session with the psychologist. ms rapallo accepted that such a communication should be recorded in the parenting application then used by the parties. she then accepted that it was not there. when asked why not, she gave evidence “i didn’t send it.”   ms rapallo denied sending an email to a psychologist on 20 august 2021. she agreed the email was sent from her email address. she claims that the first time she saw an email sent on 20 august 2021 was when she saw it in mr whalan’s affidavit. a reply was sent to her on 23 august 2021 referring to the previous email. it is inconceivable that having received that reply, ms rapallo would remain unaware of the email from her address on 20 august 2021. inconsistently with her initial evidence that she did not send the email on 20 august 2021, she gave subsequent oral evidence that she does not recall sending it. when she was asked whether she was honestly saying someone else sent the email or whether she might just have forgotten, she answered that she did not know. (b) three emails were sent from ms rapallo’s email address to a psychologist on 25 october 2021 between 9:11pm and 9:20pm. ms rapallo accepted she sent the first two, but denied sending the third, giving oral evidence that she did not recall that one. she claimed that it contained words that were not hers. when the alternative was put to her, namely that someone else hacked into her email address and sent it, her response was simply “i can’t confirm that.” the psychologist replied to those emails the following morning, including a copy of the third email which ms rapallo claims contained words that were not hers. it is fanciful for ms rapallo to claim that she was unaware of the emails sent and received by her at that time. (c) ms rapallo also denies having sent an email from the same email address on 8 november 2021. the email was sent to the same psychologist and copied into ms rapallo’s then legal representative. the email contains detailed information not only about x and his father, but also refers to conversations between the psychologist and ms rapallo. when that detail was pointed out to ms rapallo, her evidence changed to “i don’t recall.” it is fanciful to suggest that anybody else could have sent the email from ms rapallo’s email address on 8 november 2021.   three emails were sent from ms rapallo’s email address to a psychologist on 25 october 2021 between 9:11pm and 9:20pm. ms rapallo accepted she sent the first two, but denied sending the third, giving oral evidence that she did not recall that one. she claimed that it contained words that were not hers. when the alternative was put to her, namely that someone else hacked into her email address and sent it, her response was simply “i can’t confirm that.” the psychologist replied to those emails the following morning, including a copy of the third email which ms rapallo claims contained words that were not hers. it is fanciful for ms rapallo to claim that she was unaware of the emails sent and received by her at that time. (c) ms rapallo also denies having sent an email from the same email address on 8 november 2021. the email was sent to the same psychologist and copied into ms rapallo’s then legal representative. the email contains detailed information not only about x and his father, but also refers to conversations between the psychologist and ms rapallo. when that detail was pointed out to ms rapallo, her evidence changed to “i don’t recall.” it is fanciful to suggest that anybody else could have sent the email from ms rapallo’s email address on 8 november 2021.   ms rapallo also denies having sent an email from the same email address on 8 november 2021. the email was sent to the same psychologist and copied into ms rapallo’s then legal representative. the email contains detailed information not only about x and his father, but also refers to conversations between the psychologist and ms rapallo. when that detail was pointed out to ms rapallo, her evidence changed to “i don’t recall.” it is fanciful to suggest that anybody else could have sent the email from ms rapallo’s email address on 8 november 2021.
statutory framef
primary considerations
the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with both of his parents
the need to protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
has mr whalan broken into ms rapallo’s home?
mr robinson: the police just composed that themselves? [ms rapallo]: i did not make that statement, your honour. mr robinson: did the police just compose that themselves? [ms rapallo]: i don’t know, i did not make that statement. mr robinson: where would they have got that information from if not from you? [ms rapallo]: [mr whalan] has friends at the [suburb h] police station. mr robinson: so do you think that they prepared that to trap you, is that what you think? [ms rapallo]: i can’t say, your honour. mr robinson: well, you were on your oath, can you explain to the court why it was your answer to my question was that [mr whalan] has friends at the [suburb h] police station? [ms rapallo]: the only reason [mr whalan] would have known that i was at [suburb h] police station... he was not following me. i drove away from [mr whalan]’s street. i did not reverse and or drive... reversing down a street, um, i’m not that good of a driver... i, um, drove [x] away from [mr whalan]’s home and parked around the corner. [mr whalan] could not have seen me making a phone call to the, um, [suburb h] police station. um, the officer told me that i should attend the station. i, um, attended [suburb h] police station.
mr robinson: how is it that there is a statement attached to your affidavit concerning the events on this day? [ms rapallo]: i did not make that statement. mr robinson: listen carefully to my question. how is it that there is a statement attached to your affidavit concerning the events of this day? [ms rapallo]: i added the statement. mr robinson: pardon? [ms rapallo]: how it is attached? it-it is attached. mr robinson: how did it come to be there if you didn’t make that statement? [ms rapallo]: i wanted to note that i did not make that statement because it was not signed and i did not speak to the police. um, [x] and i entered the police station for one minute and then another officer actually came into the room and told me that [mr whalan] had attended the station, so [x] and i were escorted away from the police ... escorted back to my car and we left the sta -- the police station. his honour: did you say you were there for thirty seconds? [ms rapallo]: a couple of -- five minutes at the most. ...... mr robinson: so that’s a two page statement, do you agree that you gave all of those details to the police on that day? [ms rapallo]: i did not, your honour. mr robinson: can you explain to the court why they’re there, firstly? why are the details in the statement then? [ms rapallo]: they’re there because i’m showing, that i did not sign that affidavit. um, and there have been a number of occasions where documents have appeared um, in my home um and documents have been taken from email addresses and also my home. mr robinson: [ms rapallo], paragraph 8 of that statement says as follows: i sent a text message at 4:00pm to [mr whalan] stating: “[x] is capable of walking down your driveway alone to get onto my car. remain at your door – stay away from me and my car”. [ms rapallo]: yes. mr robinson: do you - did you send that text message? [ms rapallo]: yes, and [mr whalan] had that... mr robinson: you told the police that you sent that text message, didn’t you? [ms rapallo]: yes, and [mr whalan] also had that... mr robinson: and that’s why they put it in the statement? [ms rapallo]: and [mr whalan] also had that text message. mr robinson: just listen to me carefully, that’s why they put it in the statement, didn’t they? [ms rapallo]: yes mr robinson: and the other details in this statement, it goes on for two pages, you gave those details to the police, didn’t you? [ms rapallo]: no, i did not. mr robinson: ok, can you explain how they typed them in there then? [ms rapallo]: i can’t explain that, your honour. mr robinson: can you explain how you got hold of this statement? [ms rapallo]: it’s in my house, it was in my house and in my documents. mr robinson: how did it come to be in your house? [ms rapallo]: i’m unaware. mr robinson: really? so this unsigned police statement just turned up in your house? did it? [ms rapallo]: yes, your honour.
mr robinson: it’s a very different story to turning up and only being there for a minute, isn’t it? [ms rapallo]: it was five minutes, and i was not there with [x] for two hours. mr robinson: can i suggest to you it was actually a lot more than five minutes, which is why a police statement was prepared on your instruction? [ms rapallo]: i didn’t sign it, it was not signed, and i did not make that police statement. his honour: can you answer the question? [ms rapallo]: it was, it says it was longer than five minutes on the statement. mr robinson: do you remember that statement? [ms rapallo]: no your honour. mr robinson: statement taken and signature witnessed by me at 5:49pm on first nine 2019 at [suburb h]. i agree you haven’t signed it, but that says 5:49pm, and that is nearly two hours after you collected [x]. can you explain to the court why the police would have put that time in there? [ms rapallo]: i can’t explain that, your honour. mr robinson: can i suggest to you the reason they put that time in there is because that’s when you were sitting in the station with them at 5:49pm? do you agree with that? [ms rapallo]: no i don’t. mr robinson: and this is the statement that you say you’ve never seen before but it just turned up in your house one day, is that right? [ms rapallo]: correct. mr robinson: when did you find it in your house one day? [ms rapallo]: after the fact. mr robinson: when? [ms rapallo]: i can’t recall, i was going through my notes. mr robinson: it must have been such a rude shock to you to find that statement there? [ms rapallo]: yes. mr robinson: did you report to the police that someone had broken into your house and put a statement in there? [ms rapallo]: no. mr robinson: why not? [ms rapallo]: because [mr whalan] had previously had my house keys, um and... mr robinson: so it was [mr whalan] who did it, was it? [ms rapallo]: i can’t recall. i don’t know. mr robinson: well, by inference, because the first explanation you offer in answer to my question is: “[mr whalan] had my house keys.” i assume you mean therefore [mr whalan] put the statement in your house? [ms rapallo]: i don’t have evidence along those lines. mr robinson: but surely, given the amount of times you’ve reported [mr whalan]’s behaviour to police, evidence that he had entered your house and left this statement, this unsigned statement that you’d never seen before, that would have been something you’d be wanting to tell the police? [ms rapallo]: i tried to avoid going to the police station, so...
has mr whalan stalked, tracked, or interfered with electronic platforms to surveil ms rapallo?
has mr whalan threatened or attempted to murder ms rapallo?
has mr whalan sexually interfered with x?  whalan] on a more important serious note, do you know why [x] doesn’t want kisses and tickles ? but [x] wants to keep his hand on his mothers chest in bed all night more so since april 50/50?? he has been like this since shared 50/50 in april 2022 . [x]’s mother has enforced that no- body - no- one not his mother not father - touch [x]’s private parts ever .. i have reiterated to [x] since he was 4 years old , and old enough to wash himself in the bath and now in the shower. would you know why [x] doesn’t want his mother to leave his side ? thankfully for [x]’s well-being his mother knows educated high standing community individuals.[20]   would get out of the shower and put his towel around - underneath his willy, as he says, and he would come to me with the towel underneath his willy um and his willy outside, and then put his um willy on my leg. and i’m like, why are you doing that [x], like what is going on? you don’t do that to anyone and anything. he’s like, oh, that’s what daddy does to me. and i said, i was shocked, i felt like vomiting. i um, again, the reason why i um wanted to see a psychologist to find out why [x] would do and say um such a thing um when he would come out of the shower or bath.
inconsistency between ms rapallo’s allegations and her proposal for x’s time with his father
additional considerations
any views expressed by x and any factors (such as his maturity or level of understanding) that are relevant to the weight to be given to his views  [sic] himself advocates for a continuation of the current parenting arrangement – not for reasons of loyalty or because he has been coached – but because he is developmentally able to live with each parent for an extended block, scaffolded around his school routine, without the rigours of multiple changeovers between two households each week. in ordinary circumstances, there is a strong argument that the current structure for this boy should be continued.[26]
the nature of x’s relationships with each of his parents and other people, including any grandparent or other relative
the extent to which each of x’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to x, to spend time with him, and to communicate with him
the extent to which each of x’s parents has fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain him
the likely effect of any changes in x’s circumstances, including the likely effect on him of any separation from either of his parents, or any other child or other person, including grandparent or other relative, with whom he has been living
further change is highly undesirable. it would be distressing for [x] to see his mother less.[30]
the practical difficulty and expense of x spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect his right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of each of x’s parents and any other person, including any grandparent or other relative of x, to provide for x’s needs, including emotional and intellectual needs
her unnecessary exposure of this child to doctors and psychologists, without input from the father, was ill advised. her repeated questioning of the child is likely to have engendered confusion, psychological burden, and distress. through her own anxiety and lack of recognition about the benefit of [mr whalan]’s involvement, she has probably created a level of anxiety and sense of division in the child. there are the notes in the bag (including around being safe), the refusal to allow [x] to go to school camp, the recurring reports to cps and police, the discussion about how much she misses him, the ongoing co-sleeping with a primary school aged boy. none of this benefits the child.[32]
the mother is anxious, she’s concerned, she doesn’t see um the child as content and happy and well with the father. she believes the child should be predominantly in her care.... she won’t give up on [x]. she sees it as a battle to be won and-and to suggest that that’s not going to be deposited, very subtly, in this child, cumulatively, over a matter of years, is entirely erroneous, and-and in my forensic experience, highly improbable.
i am concerned that this boy is subject to a series of very subtle cues that cause him to feel a sense of restraint about his relationship with his father, and um, i can’t with certainty advise the court whether this is a conscious thing coming from the maternal environment or whether it stems from an underlying anxiety, or whether there is a co-dependence, there is potentially multiple things happening. but i have formed the view, having now met this little boy twice, that there are subtle cues that this boy should not enjoy an unencumbered relationship with his dad. and, whilst the mother may argue she’s never, you know, spoken ill of the child, and has never done anything that would influence the child, i’ve seen videos of this boy being questioned about ah, dad said he’s gonna kill mum. and the questions are suggestive, um leading, um coercive, and to pre-suppose that doesn’t land with this boy in a very distinct way, in the way in which i’ve described, it’s just entirely counter-factual and illogical in my view. so, we’re not talking about, just to clarify, we are not talking about this boy being scared of his dad, we’re talking about this boy feeling pressure from one side of his family, his mother’s side, the maternal environment, about the relationship he has with the paternal side of his family. and that pressure might not be overt, although at times, there has been demonstrable examples of where it’s been counter-productive and unhelpful, it’s more subtle than that, there’s more nuance to it than that. it’s about having a sense of restraint.... the mother is a competent, loving parent, but that doesn’t extend to being a competent, loving separated parent, where she is not an island on her own, you know, not requiring to consult with the child’s other parent, she can’t make unilateral decisions, she can’t expose this boy to a whole lot of treatments, and assessments, and interviews, and professional consultations without involving this boy’s dad. and so, some of these things are quite subtle, but they’re important when we start to evaluate, well what’s it going to look like when this kid’s 13 or 14, and starting to assert his will a bit more forcefully in what he wants to happen. and what we tend to see, and again this is anecdotal, but it is supported empirically, these kids start to split off from one of their parents, when they’re about 12, 13, 14 years of age. and it can go in either directions. and that subtle influence, and those messages of restraint, under cover of solicitude, you’ll be ok with your dad, that sends – the optics of that – kids are smart, they’re perceptive, they’re intuitive, they pick up on that. and after years and years and years of growing up in that sort of environment, they go it’s too hard, and they can’t compartmentalise their experience anymore, so they stop going to one of their parents entirely, and they split off from one of their parents, and that often then, i see these matters in our rooms, um it gets pretty hard to put the toothpaste back in the tube at that point when they’re split off. and that’s my concern for this boy.  would be delighted that you now want him to attend [k school] next year for grade 1 in 2022 with his cousins. rates notices are required as proof of residence for zoning. enrolment forms are still online. [mr l] is awaiting your correspondence.
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of x and of either of his parents, and any other relevant characteristics of x
if x is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child, his right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order will have on that right
the attitude to x, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of x’s parents
any family violence involving x or a member of his family
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to x or a member of x’s family, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, and any other relevant matter
... i would consider it is abjectly unhelpful for the parties to have resorted to such frequent use of intervention orders and police reports, in circumstances where neither is in acute danger. i am unconvinced that the level of threat or risk posed by the conduct of either parent, while probably unhelpful, justifies such excessive use of services that are designed to keep the most vulnerable members of the community safe. their respective behaviour in this respect has been churlish, immature, strategic, and defensive.[41]
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to x
any other relevant fact or circumstance
parental responsibility
you are waisting [sic] [x] money, my time and resources . stop now. you are a bipolar, controlling , manipulative excuse for a person. i pray for your healing, you ill soul. i prey [sic] for [x]’s continued vibrant health as he is when in his mothers care. i prey that he doesn’t have the same mental drives as you you damaged soulless individual.[45]
conclusions
associate: dated: 20 february 2023
dated: 20 february 2023
[1] exhibit a1. [2] exhibit a2. [3] carlson & fluvium [2012] famca 32 (“carlson & fluvium”) at [165] quoted with approval in adamson & adamson [2014] famcafc 232; (2014) flc 93-622 (“adamson”) at [89-90].[4] carlson & fluvium at [168] quoted with approval in adamson at [89-90]. [5] adamson at [90].[6] affidavit of dr d filed 22 december 2022, annexure 2 (“family report”), paragraph 43.[7] family law act 1975 (cth), s 60b.[8] family law act 1975 (cth), s 60ca. [9] family law act 1975 (cth), s 61da. [10] family law act 1975 (cth), s 65daa.[11] mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [26]; mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) flc 93-405 at [115], [121]. [12] family report, paragraph 44. [13] family report, paragraph 44. [14] u v u [2002] hca 36; (2002) 211 clr 238 at [83]. [15] goldman & goldman [2018] famcafc 65; (2018) flc 93-830 at [23].[16] muldoon & carlyle [2012] famcafc 135; (2012) flc 93-513 at [105] and the cases there cited. [17] family report, paragraphs 43 to 45. [18] affidavit of mr whalan filed 30 january 2023, page 154.[19] affidavit of mr whalan filed 30 january 2023, annexure 28, page 154. [20] affidavit of mr whalan filed 30 january 2023, paragraph 127. [21] family law act 1975 (cth), ss 4(1). [22] family report, paragraph 40. [23] affidavit of mr whalan filed 30 january 2023, annexure 12, page 106. [24] blass & blass [2022] fedcfamc1a 63; (2022) flc 94-085 at [40]. [25] family report, paragraph 30. [26] family report, paragraph 41. [27] family report, paragraph 41. [28] family report, paragraph 44. [29] family report, paragraph 38. [30] family report, paragraph 44. [31] family report, paragraph 40.[32] family report, paragraph 40.[33] family report, paragraph 43.[34] report of associate professor g filed 1 february 2023, page 6. [35] family report, paragraph 44. [36] affidavit of dr d filed 3 february 2022, annexure 2 (“child impact report”), paragraph 33. [37] family report, paragraph 31. [38] child impact report, paragraph 29. [39] affidavit of mr whalan’s filed 30 january 2023, paragraph 25. [40] affidavit of mr whalan’s filed 30 january 2023, paragraph 67. [41] child impact report, paragraph 31.[42] family report, paragraph 45. [43] family law act 1975 (cth), s 65dac; boyle & zahur & another [2017] famcafc 263; (2017) flc 93-814 at [22]. [44] family report, paragraph 46(a). [45] affidavit of mr whalan’s filed 30 january 2023, paragraph 122(c). [46] family report, paragraph 45. [47] family report, paragraph 44. [48] family report, paragraph 44. [49] hearne v street [2008] hca 36; (2008) 235 clr 125 per hayne, heydon & crennan jj at [96]. [50] springfield nominees pty ltd v bridgelands securities ltd (1992) 38 fcr 217 at 225.