last updated: 11 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
cress & cress [2023] fedcfamc2f 168
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch:
introduction  x, born in 2011 and currently 11 years and 6 months old, (b) y, born in 2013 and currently 9 years and 8 months old, and (c) z, born in 2014 and currently 8 years and 3 months old.   y, born in 2013 and currently 9 years and 8 months old, and (c) z, born in 2014 and currently 8 years and 3 months old.   z, born in 2014 and currently 8 years and 3 months old.  he children”).
evidence
background
and the parties shall: attend all appointments as directed by the expert, undergo all medical examinations and tests and sign all documents as directed by the expert, and otherwise comply with all reasonable directions and requests made by the expert to assist the expert in the preparation of the report. that neither party shall denigrate the other party or a member of that parties’ family or household in the presence or hearing of the children nor permit the children to remain in the presence or hearing of any persons who engage in such denigrative behaviour. that the respondent mother shall pay the applicant father’s costs of and incidental to these proceedings.
the law
discussion ] ...must discourage review applications of this nature being brought except in truly urgent circumstances. the risk is that such applications are brought on any occasion on which a party merely disagrees with a decision of a registrar, in particular in relation to the listing of matters. ... [44] ...the court has a responsibility when allocating dates to make an assessment of priority as against other matters. it must balance the allocation of dates with other matters with equally competing priorities.   the applicant has demonstrated a reasonable basis for arguing for the substantive orders sought, (b) the applicant has demonstrated that absent an urgent listing the applicant will be prejudiced in relation to the substantive relief sought other than in ways common to other matters awaiting the court’s attention in the normal course, (c) the applicant has demonstrated that there has been no unreasonable or unexplained delay in approaching the court, and (d) a judicial officer is available to hear the substantive application. (emphasis added)  ] registrars on a daily basis deal with applications for abridgments and urgent listings and are best placed to allocate listings having regard to urgency considerations and the overall business of the court. the court will accord priority to cases depending on the urgency that presents itself on a case by case basis by carefully weighing competing considerations such as the factual basis for the urgency asserted, including any issues of safety or risk, and the delay in bringing an application. [33] this assessment is in the context of an extremely busy court where resources must be allocated efficiently and effectively, and where many parties may consider their application to be urgent for them. in the absence of urgency, a case will be given a first return date at an appropriate time allowing for service on the respondent and the filing of a response to an initiating application.
associate: dated: 20 february 2023
dated: 20 february 2023