last updated: 28 march 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mears & hilton (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 166
orders
the court orders that:  make an appointment to begin the intake process, (b) upon acceptance by the centre as suitable for change-over and/or supervised contact between the father and children, enquire with the chosen supervision service as to the availability of the supervised times and dates that will occur there, as set out in these orders, and (c) attend the chosen supervision service at the times and dates set out in these orders, where these can be accommodated by the chosen supervision service.   upon acceptance by the centre as suitable for change-over and/or supervised contact between the father and children, enquire with the chosen supervision service as to the availability of the supervised times and dates that will occur there, as set out in these orders, and (c) attend the chosen supervision service at the times and dates set out in these orders, where these can be accommodated by the chosen supervision service.   attend the chosen supervision service at the times and dates set out in these orders, where these can be accommodated by the chosen supervision service.   for a period of two months from the expiration of order 4 with the father only, (i) each alternative weekend for up to four hours on a saturday with such time to be supervised by the nominated supervision service at a time that can be accommodated by the service. (b) after a period of two months with the father and, if he so chooses, his current partner and their children, (i) each alternative weekend for up to four hours on a saturday with such time to be supervised by the nominated supervision service at a time that can be accommodated by the service. (c) subject to the father completing a parenting after separation course in accordance with order 13, after a period of three months, (i) each alternative weekend for up to four hours on a saturday with such time to be unsupervised save to the extent that changeover at the commencement and conclusion of such time shall be facilitated by an agreed third-party intermediary or supervised by a professional contact service selected in accordance with the following order.   each alternative weekend for up to four hours on a saturday with such time to be supervised by the nominated supervision service at a time that can be accommodated by the service.   after a period of two months with the father and, if he so chooses, his current partner and their children, (i) each alternative weekend for up to four hours on a saturday with such time to be supervised by the nominated supervision service at a time that can be accommodated by the service. (c) subject to the father completing a parenting after separation course in accordance with order 13, after a period of three months, (i) each alternative weekend for up to four hours on a saturday with such time to be unsupervised save to the extent that changeover at the commencement and conclusion of such time shall be facilitated by an agreed third-party intermediary or supervised by a professional contact service selected in accordance with the following order.   subject to the father completing a parenting after separation course in accordance with order 13, after a period of three months, (i) each alternative weekend for up to four hours on a saturday with such time to be unsupervised save to the extent that changeover at the commencement and conclusion of such time shall be facilitated by an agreed third-party intermediary or supervised by a professional contact service selected in accordance with the following order.   each alternative weekend for up to four hours on a saturday with such time to be unsupervised save to the extent that changeover at the commencement and conclusion of such time shall be facilitated by an agreed third-party intermediary or supervised by a professional contact service selected in accordance with the following order.   each wednesday between 6.00 pm and 6.30 pm, and (b) any other time as agreed between the parties in writing.   any other time as agreed between the parties in writing.   in the case of the mother, that the children and the father will be afforded privacy during such calls without interruption, and (b) in the case of the father, that unless otherwise agreed by the mother in writing, no other person shall be visible or audible during the communication.   in the case of the father, that unless otherwise agreed by the mother in writing, no other person shall be visible or audible during the communication.   the father fails to attend for the purpose of spending time with the children in accordance with order 6 on three consecutive occasions, or (b) the father fails to communicate with the children in accordance with order 9 on three consecutive occasions.   the father fails to communicate with the children in accordance with order 9 on three consecutive occasions.   insulting, belittling, degrading, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party or members of their immediate family in the presence or within the hearing of the children or on social media, and from permitting any other person to do so. (b) discussing these proceedings to, with, or within hearing or presence of the children and from permitting any other person to do so.   discussing these proceedings to, with, or within hearing or presence of the children and from permitting any other person to do so.
reasons for judgment
deputy chief judge mcclelland:
background
relevant people
chronology of significant events
4. that the children shall spend time with the father as follows :   each alternate weekend from 5pm each friday to 3pm each sunday.
5. that changeover shall occur at the carpark of [k shopping centre, town c]. that the children shall have telephone communication with the father by telephone, skype, facetime or other video chat method on a day agreed to between the parties between the core hours of 5.30pm to 7.30pm. that each party notify the other party of any serious illness or emergency concerning the child as soon as practicable to do so. that each party authorise and do all things and sign all documents and give all consents necessary to enable any relevant health or educational, professional and any school attended by the children to provide to each parent copies of reports and any other information or documentation relevant to the children’s health and education and to record each parents’ details as emergency contact persons, provided this order shall act as sufficient authority for such consent. that each party be at liberty to attend any social, sporting or educational activities involving the children to which parents are ordinarily invited to attend. that each party notify the other party of any change to their address, telephone number or email address within 24 hours of such change occurring. that both parties be and are hereby restrained from criticising or denigrating the other party and/or their family or friends in the presence of or within the hearing of the children or on any forms of social media and shall ensure that no third party does so in the presence and/or hearing of the children (as per the original)
4. that the children shall spend time with the father as follows: for a period of three months (a) each alterate sunday for a peirod of no less than three hours, with such time to be supervised by the respondent mother. following the cessation of the three month period in 4(a) above,   each alterate sunday for a peirod of no less than three hours, with such time to be supervised by the respondent mother.   each alternate saturday for a period of six hours.
following the cessation of the three month peirod in 4(b) above,   each alteranate weekend from 5pm each friday to 3pm each sunday.   per the original)
credit
as a general proposition, civil courts usually refrain from specific adverse credit findings against litigants if the disposition of the case can legitimately be achieved otherwise. there are good reasons for that approach. for example, a specific finding that a litigant has misled the court might be tantamount to a finding of perjury. further, it can be accepted as a given that human beings have the capacity to reconstruct or rationalise or even misconstrue past events or conduct, or to engage in self-justification, particularly in recounting events in highly emotive settings or in respect of highly emotive issues. this may make the distinction between an honest, although wrong, account on the one hand, and a deliberate and calculated obfuscation on the other, difficult to draw.
it follows from [the observations of kent j] that in parenting proceedings an adverse credit finding against a parent should not only be necessary to determine the real issues joined between the parties but should be soundly based, with due allowance for the limitations referred to [by kent j].
witnesses are supposed to answer questions put by counsel responsively: they are supposed to give a full answer, but no more. it is one thing to say that a witness was not asked the right questions. it is another thing to say that a witness did not answer the questions that were asked. and it is an even more serious thing to say that a witness was “reluctant” to answer. the duty of a witness is to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth so far as the questions asked seek it. the duty of a witness to answer questions responsively involves not only a negative duty (not to volunteer material for which the question does not call), but also a positive duty (to proffer all material within the witness’s knowledge for which the question does call).
the father
ms e
the mother
documents relied upon
the parties’ respective applications
living with/parental responsibility that the parties shall have equal shared parental responsibility for the children, namely [x] born [in] 2018 and [y] born [in] 2019 ("the children"). if the parties cannot agree on a medical or health decision with respect to the children, then the matter will be determined according to the recommendation(s) made by the children’s treating general practitioner which the children are seeing, except for the covid-19 vaccination. 3. the children shall live with the mother. spend time with: 4. that the children spend time with the father as follows:
a. for a period of two (2) months. each alternate weekend from 10:00am saturday until 3:00pm sunday. b. from the conclusion of order (a) herein: each alternate weekend from after school/day-care friday until 3pm sunday c. at any such other time as agreed between the parties in writing.
changeover for the purposes of changeover, unless as otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, changeover is to occur at the children’s school or day-care on a school day and at [p petrol station], [q street, town r] on a non-school day. special occasions that the children spend additional time with the parties over christmas as follows: with the mother from christmas eve 9am until 5pm new year’s day 2022 and each alternate year thereafter. with the father from christmas eve 9am until 5pm new year’s day 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. that notwithstanding any order to the contrary, if the children are not already spending time with the father pursuant to these orders, the children are to spend additional time with the father for the full father’s day weekend from 10:00am saturday until 3:00pm sunday. the mother’s time with the children will be suspended if the father’s day weekend falls when she is due to spend time with the children pursuant to these orders. that notwithstanding any order to the contrary, if the children are not already spending time with the mother pursuant to these orders, the children are to spend additional time with the mother for the full mother’s day weekend from 10:00am saturday until 3:00pm sunday. the father’s time with the children will be suspended if the mother’s day weekend falls when she is due to spend time with the children pursuant to these orders. that notwithstanding any order to the contrary, on the children’s birthday from 12:00pm until 6:00pm with the parent with whom the children are not otherwise living with on that day. in the event that the children’s birthday falls on a school day, with the parent with whom they are not living with from after school/day-care until 6:00pm. telephone communication that the father communicate with the children by way of facetime and/or telephone as follows:
a. each wednesday between 6:30pm and 7:00pm b. at any other time as requested by the children, and c. at any other time as agreed between the parties in writing. for the purposes of order 12 herein, the father is to initiate such telephone contact by calling the mother’s mobile telephone. once the telephone call is connected, the children and the father will be afforded privacy during such calls without interruption.
restraints the parties, their servants and agents be and are hereby restrained by injunction from: a) insulting, belittling, degrading, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party or members of their immediate family in the presence or within the hearing of the children and from permitting any other person to do so and on social media. b) discussing these proceedings to, with, or within hearing or presence of the children and from permitting any other person to do so. that the mother be restrained by injunction from changing [y] and [x]’s principal place of residence from the [town c] region without the written consent of the other party or an order of the court. travel that: pursuant to s11 of the australian passports act 2005 (cth), the parties do all acts and things and sign all documents as necessary to apply for and maintain a current australian passport with respect to the children. pursuant to s65y of the family law act 1975 (cth), either party be permitted to travel overseas with the children upon providing the other party no less than 21 days’ notice of the intention to travel and the dates of the period of travel, unless in the event of a family emergency in which immediate notice will be provided to the other party upon such travel becoming known. the travelling party, no less than 21 days before departure shall provide to the other party copies of:
a) insulting, belittling, degrading, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other party or members of their immediate family in the presence or within the hearing of the children and from permitting any other person to do so and on social media. b) discussing these proceedings to, with, or within hearing or presence of the children and from permitting any other person to do so.
b) discussing these proceedings to, with, or within hearing or presence of the children and from permitting any other person to do so.
i. the flight(s) itinerary, an itinerary of destinations, including the name and address of accommodation the children will be staying, and the contract details, including phone number, the children can be contacted on whilst they are away. upon the parent seeking to travel complying with order 16(b) and 16(c), the other parent will not unreasonable without consent. the passports are to be held by the mother, except as necessary for travel. the mother will not withhold the passports from the father or the children for the purposes of planned travel. should either party wish to travel interstate with the children, the party seeking to travel must provide the other party with no less than fourteen (14) days notice of their intention to travel with the children, except for canberra in which no notice is required to be given. the terms of the notice must include the following: i. the dates of the period of travel ii. the flight itinerary any itinerary of destinations, including the name and address of accommodation the children will be staying, and the contact details, including phone number, the children can be contacted on whilst they are away. that the parties do all things and sign all documents necessary to maintain a valid and current australian passport for each of the children, and the costs of renewing the passports shall be borne equally between the parties.
other that within fourteen (14) days of the making of these orders, the father will forthwith enrol and participate in a parenting after separation course with [b counsellors] and will provide a copy of the completion certificate to the mother within seven (7) days of receipt of same. miscellaneous that the matter be removed from the pending cases list. that there be no orders as to costs. (as per the original)   approaching, contacting or coming into contact with the mother or the children by any means whatsoever. (b) attending any home, school, after school or care facility or other place where the mother and/or children reside or are reasonably expected to attend, and (c) removing, attempting to remove or approaching the children on any occasion outside these orders. (d) pursuant to section 68c of the family law act 1975, if a police officer believes on reasonable grounds that the father against whom the injunction is directed, has breached the injunction by causing or threatening to cause bodily harm to the child, or harassing, molesting or stalking, that person may arrest the father without a warrant.   attending any home, school, after school or care facility or other place where the mother and/or children reside or are reasonably expected to attend, and (c) removing, attempting to remove or approaching the children on any occasion outside these orders. (d) pursuant to section 68c of the family law act 1975, if a police officer believes on reasonable grounds that the father against whom the injunction is directed, has breached the injunction by causing or threatening to cause bodily harm to the child, or harassing, molesting or stalking, that person may arrest the father without a warrant.   removing, attempting to remove or approaching the children on any occasion outside these orders. (d) pursuant to section 68c of the family law act 1975, if a police officer believes on reasonable grounds that the father against whom the injunction is directed, has breached the injunction by causing or threatening to cause bodily harm to the child, or harassing, molesting or stalking, that person may arrest the father without a warrant.   pursuant to section 68c of the family law act 1975, if a police officer believes on reasonable grounds that the father against whom the injunction is directed, has breached the injunction by causing or threatening to cause bodily harm to the child, or harassing, molesting or stalking, that person may arrest the father without a warrant.
statutory context
the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
best interests of the child
issues relating to the children - their views, level of maturity, culture and relationships:
issues relating to the parents - decision making, time spent with children, fulfilled obligations, attitude, capacity and exercise of responsibility:
issues of family violence:
effect of change:
practical difficulty of implementation:
avoiding further proceedings:
other relevant matters:
consideration
family violence
on 3 november 2020, [the father] was holding [y]. i asked him if i could go and put a rug on my horse, [the father] began to scream at me “you’re worthless, everything you have has been handed to you on a plate, you’re going nowhere in life, you’re a failure, you can’t do anything, you’re mentally unstable, you’re a bad mum, i should take the kids off of you and you should just go jump off a bridge.” [the father] at this point was still holding [y] with his toes on top of mine screaming at me “you’re fucked cunt look at ya you’re a mess”.
meaningful relationship
...no doubt in the majority of cases, there will be a positive benefit for the child having a significant relationship with both parents, but there will also be some cases where there will be no positive benefit to be derived by a child by a court attempting to craft orders to foster a relationship with one parent, if this would not be in the child’s best interests.
further, at [117] the full court referred to the comments made by bennett j in g & c [2006] famca 994, where it was said that the “enquiry was a ‘prospective’ one which requires a court to evaluate the extent to which a meaningful or significant relationship with both parents is going to be of advantage to a child”. in other words, the focus is upon whether the child having a meaningful relationship with a particular parent will be of advantage to the child in the future.
... having a “meaningful relationship” with both parents is but one part of a set of arrangements that makes up a care arrangement. all parts of the arrangement must be considered before deciding what outcome is in the child’s best interests.
there is no legislative definition of “meaningful relationship” but for there to be a meaningful relationship, it must be healthy, worthwhile and advantageous to the child. (emphasis added)
however, that desirability only operates when there is a chance of a meaningful relationship, which is beneficial to the child. it is not, in other words, a question of contact for contact sake. if there is a situation where contact with a parent is, on balance, likely to cause more harm to the child than good, or even is not likely to confer any benefit, then little purpose is served by this court making orders for such contact. that does not detract from the desirability of the child having a meaningful relationship, but the possibility of a meaningful relationship must first exist. (emphasis added)
as i’ve stated all along supervised visits are not forever just until they understand their father is back in their lives and it is consistent contact. i’ve also always stated you need to give their minds time to adjust to having a relationship with you their father first and foremost. you are failing to look out for the impact this massive change is having on their little minds.
i guess what i’ve been up against in regard to access with the children, with the stalling of it, is more self-preservation in regards to being able to access the children through these means. so, yes, the stalling was intentional, and i - in the questioning i did agree to that, but it was in regards to some subsequently overturned proceedings, and the overarching threat of that potentially being an ongoing thing, whether that be police intervention, court proceedings outside of these ones.
issue of risk
it is noted that if the parenting arrangement exposes the children to further inconsistencies, and intermittent stopping and starting, the cumulative impact on the girls’ emotional wellbeing will intensify. [x] is currently in counselling which is considered appropriate. it is important that further exposure of the girls to intermittent parenting arrangements are avoided and if consistency cannot be obtained, there may be a need to protect the girls from ongoing emotional turmoil. this includes, if the father’s time with his children does not occur consistently, prioritising consistency in time even at the expense of limiting frequency of time.
counsel: now, if the court finds that the father is not able to engage consistently and reliably and in a – and within – on the times that are specified – would that change anything for you in terms of your recommendations? [ms o]: i’m always really hesitant to draw a line and say no time, but i think that the girls deserve consistent relationships, and if that’s not being offered, it does appear that there’s a level of damage happening to the girls that – that their wellbeing needs to be prioritised. counsel: can i ask you just to elaborate on – you say “damage”. what sort of [ms o]: they’re yearning for their dad and it’s not happening, and they’re feeling a sense of rejection and internal blame for that.
additional considerations
the children, in comparison to the observation with their mother, appeared to require more of their father’s attention and they had significant difficulties separating and saying goodbye to their father at the end of the observation, requiring [the mother] to assist in containing the children. both children cried, refused to leave and begged to stay with their father.
given the children’s ages, the children would likely have difficulty remembering such a reported close relationship especially given the time that has elapsed since they have spent significant and frequent time with him.
issues of family violence
effect of change
practical difficulty of implementation
avoiding further proceedings
other relevant matters
parental responsibility
counsel: i want to suggest to you that your capacity to communicate with [the mother] is poor? father: that’s correct. counsel: and i want to suggest to you that you and [the mother] would not be able to have a civil communication around any significant issues for these children? father: that’s correct.
conclusion
associate: dated: 21 february 2023
dated: 21 february 2023
[1] transcript 8 december 2022, p.64 line 21 to p.65 line 14.[2] transcript 8 december 2022, p.15 lines 6–9.[3] transcript 8 december 2022, p.14 lines 15–24.[4] transcript 8 december 2022. p.15 lines 1–3.[5] transcript 8 december 2022, p.45 lines 12–16.[6] transcript 8 december 2022, p.30 lines 18–23.[7] transcript 8 december 2022, p.46 line 35.[8] transcript 8 december 2022, p.32 line 10.[9] transcript 8 december 2022, p.51 lines 44–47.[10] transcript 8 december 2022, p.14 lines 1–2.[11] transcript 8 december 2022, p.49 lines 10–22.[12] transcript 8 december 2022, p.51 lines 14–17.[13] transcript 8 december 2022, p.54 lines 42–43.[14] affidavit of the mother filed 24 november 2022, paragraphs 13 and 15.[15] exhibit “b” at p.47.[16] affidavit of the mother filed 24 november 2022, paragraph 79.[17] exhibit “b” at p.48.[18] affidavit of the father filed 5 december 2022 at paragraph 38.[19] transcript 8 december 2022, p.65 lines 10–14.[20] exhibit “b” at p.21.[21] affidavit of the father filed 5 december 2022 at annexure “h”.[22] affidavit of the father filed 5 december 2022 at annexure “i”.[23] transcript 8 december 2022, p.30 line 7 to p.31 line 3.[24] transcript 8 december 2022, p.22 lines 1–3.[25] transcript 8 december 2022, p.46 lines 23–29.[26] exhibit “b” at p.26.[27] affidavit of the father filed 5 december 2022 at exhibit “c”.[28] exhibit “b” at p.17.[29] affidavit of the mother filed 25 november 2022 at annexure “f”. [30] affidavit of the mother filed 25 november 2022 at paragraphs 57, 69, 70, 84, 86, 90, 91, 97, 98, 100, 102 and 113.[31] affidavit of the mother filed 25 november 2022 at paragraphs 68, 71, 77, 104, 106, 125 and 128.[32] affidavit of the father filed 5 december 2022 at annexure “i”.[33] exhibit “b” at p.7.[34] child impact report of court child expert, ms o dated 28 july 2022 at paragraph 16.[35] exhibit “a” at p.3.[36] transcript 9 december 2022, p. 93 line 43 to p.94 line 6.[37] transcript 9 december 2022, p.93 lines 10–11.[38] child impact report of court child expert, ms o dated 28 july 2022, paragraph 8.[39] child impact report of court child expert, ms o dated 28 july 2022, paragraph 21.[40] child impact report of court child expert, ms o dated 28 july 2022, paragraph 20.[41] transcript 9 december 2022, p.97 lines 21–26.[42] transcript 9 december 2022, p.97 line 28.