last updated: 18 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hashemi & latifa [2023] fedcfamc2f 188
orders
the court orders that:  re-engage with ms b, or equivalent psychologist, and follow all reasonable directions and recommendations of such psychologist, (b) re-engage with dr c, or equivalent psychiatrist, and follow all reasonable directions and recommendations of such psychiatrist, (c) re-engage with ms d from e clinic, or equivalent mental health social worker, (d) engage in a certified english-speaking course, (e) engage with a professional in-home family support service, (f) apply for national disability insurance scheme funding for herself.   re-engage with dr c, or equivalent psychiatrist, and follow all reasonable directions and recommendations of such psychiatrist, (c) re-engage with ms d from e clinic, or equivalent mental health social worker, (d) engage in a certified english-speaking course, (e) engage with a professional in-home family support service, (f) apply for national disability insurance scheme funding for herself.   re-engage with ms d from e clinic, or equivalent mental health social worker, (d) engage in a certified english-speaking course, (e) engage with a professional in-home family support service, (f) apply for national disability insurance scheme funding for herself.   engage in a certified english-speaking course, (e) engage with a professional in-home family support service, (f) apply for national disability insurance scheme funding for herself.   engage with a professional in-home family support service, (f) apply for national disability insurance scheme funding for herself.   apply for national disability insurance scheme funding for herself.   for two consecutive saturdays for no less than two hours on each occasion (for a period nominated by the father), at a public venue such as a park (nominated by the father) supervised by the father (with the father to stay at a distance where he can see the children but not hear what is being said) and then, (b) for at least two consecutive saturdays for no less than four hours on each occasion, at a public venue (or venues) such as a park supervised by the father (with the father not to interfere with the mother’s time with the children unless the father is of a reasonable view that the children are at imminent risk) and then, (c) upon the mother providing to the father details of her compliance with orders 6(a)–(d), unsupervised overnight time at a frequency of one saturday night each week over a period of eight weeks, and then, (d) unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school friday (or 3.00pm friday during school holidays) to 10.00am sunday (two overnights) over a period of eight weeks, and then, (e) unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school friday (or 3.00pm friday during school holidays) to before school monday (or 10.00am mondays during school holidays) (three overnights) over a period of 12 weeks, and then, (f) unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school thursday (or 3.00pm thursday during school holidays) to before school monday (or 10.00am mondays during school holidays) (four overnights).   for at least two consecutive saturdays for no less than four hours on each occasion, at a public venue (or venues) such as a park supervised by the father (with the father not to interfere with the mother’s time with the children unless the father is of a reasonable view that the children are at imminent risk) and then, (c) upon the mother providing to the father details of her compliance with orders 6(a)–(d), unsupervised overnight time at a frequency of one saturday night each week over a period of eight weeks, and then, (d) unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school friday (or 3.00pm friday during school holidays) to 10.00am sunday (two overnights) over a period of eight weeks, and then, (e) unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school friday (or 3.00pm friday during school holidays) to before school monday (or 10.00am mondays during school holidays) (three overnights) over a period of 12 weeks, and then, (f) unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school thursday (or 3.00pm thursday during school holidays) to before school monday (or 10.00am mondays during school holidays) (four overnights).   upon the mother providing to the father details of her compliance with orders 6(a)–(d), unsupervised overnight time at a frequency of one saturday night each week over a period of eight weeks, and then, (d) unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school friday (or 3.00pm friday during school holidays) to 10.00am sunday (two overnights) over a period of eight weeks, and then, (e) unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school friday (or 3.00pm friday during school holidays) to before school monday (or 10.00am mondays during school holidays) (three overnights) over a period of 12 weeks, and then, (f) unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school thursday (or 3.00pm thursday during school holidays) to before school monday (or 10.00am mondays during school holidays) (four overnights).   unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school friday (or 3.00pm friday during school holidays) to 10.00am sunday (two overnights) over a period of eight weeks, and then, (e) unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school friday (or 3.00pm friday during school holidays) to before school monday (or 10.00am mondays during school holidays) (three overnights) over a period of 12 weeks, and then, (f) unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school thursday (or 3.00pm thursday during school holidays) to before school monday (or 10.00am mondays during school holidays) (four overnights).   unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school friday (or 3.00pm friday during school holidays) to before school monday (or 10.00am mondays during school holidays) (three overnights) over a period of 12 weeks, and then, (f) unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school thursday (or 3.00pm thursday during school holidays) to before school monday (or 10.00am mondays during school holidays) (four overnights).   unsupervised overnight time each fortnight from after school thursday (or 3.00pm thursday during school holidays) to before school monday (or 10.00am mondays during school holidays) (four overnights).   exposing the children to violence including physical or verbal threats or intimidation, whether such threats or intimidation or violence be directed at the children, the mother, the father or any other member of either party’s household, (b) physically disciplining the children, (c) denigrating the other or members of the other party’s family in the presence or hearing of the children and each party shall do all acts and things reasonably necessary to prevent any other person doing so, (d) discussing these proceedings or any issues arising out of these proceedings with the children or permitting any third party to do so, (e) making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, such as facebook or twitter in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (f) being under the influence of alcohol in the presence of the children or whilst the children are in his or her care and, (g) knowingly bringing the children into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess, (h) failing to adequately feed the children when the children are in their care.   physically disciplining the children, (c) denigrating the other or members of the other party’s family in the presence or hearing of the children and each party shall do all acts and things reasonably necessary to prevent any other person doing so, (d) discussing these proceedings or any issues arising out of these proceedings with the children or permitting any third party to do so, (e) making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, such as facebook or twitter in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (f) being under the influence of alcohol in the presence of the children or whilst the children are in his or her care and, (g) knowingly bringing the children into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess, (h) failing to adequately feed the children when the children are in their care.   denigrating the other or members of the other party’s family in the presence or hearing of the children and each party shall do all acts and things reasonably necessary to prevent any other person doing so, (d) discussing these proceedings or any issues arising out of these proceedings with the children or permitting any third party to do so, (e) making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, such as facebook or twitter in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (f) being under the influence of alcohol in the presence of the children or whilst the children are in his or her care and, (g) knowingly bringing the children into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess, (h) failing to adequately feed the children when the children are in their care.   discussing these proceedings or any issues arising out of these proceedings with the children or permitting any third party to do so, (e) making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, such as facebook or twitter in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (f) being under the influence of alcohol in the presence of the children or whilst the children are in his or her care and, (g) knowingly bringing the children into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess, (h) failing to adequately feed the children when the children are in their care.   making critical or derogatory remarks on social media, such as facebook or twitter in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, (f) being under the influence of alcohol in the presence of the children or whilst the children are in his or her care and, (g) knowingly bringing the children into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess, (h) failing to adequately feed the children when the children are in their care.   being under the influence of alcohol in the presence of the children or whilst the children are in his or her care and, (g) knowingly bringing the children into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess, (h) failing to adequately feed the children when the children are in their care.   knowingly bringing the children into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or alcohol in excess, (h) failing to adequately feed the children when the children are in their care.   failing to adequately feed the children when the children are in their care.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
1.1 each wednesday between 3pm and 5pm 1.2 each saturday between 11am and 1pm 1.3 at any other time as agreed between the parties. that the mother be permitted to communicate with the children by telephone each tuesday and thursday at 5pm, and at any other time as agreed between the parties. notation: the court notes that the mother maintains that her time with the children should be unsupervised and for longer periods and seeks that [z] return to live with her. the parties have agreed to these orders to facilitate the mother’s ongoing relationship with the children while awaiting the preparation of the expert report of [dr f], who has arranged appointments with the parents and children in october 2021. notation: the court notes that these orders finalise all current interim proceedings on foot.
...
and the court notes that: the mother is requested to complete the family violence cross examination form available at https://www.legalaid.nsw.gov.au/for-lawyers/family-violence-and-cross-examination-of-parties-scheme as a matter of priority and return their completed form to legal aid nsw:
i. in person at any legal aid nsw office, or in person to a family advocacy and support services lawyer or support worker at the parramatta registry of the federal circuit and family court of australia, or iii. by post to po box k847 haymarket nsw 1240, or iv. by email to crossexamscheme@legalaid.nsw.gov.au.
proposals
material relied upon  affidavit filed 19 august 2022.   further amended response filed 11 january 2023, (b) affidavits filed 8 august 2022 and 11 january 2023.   affidavits filed 8 august 2022 and 11 january 2023.   single expert report of dr f dated 7 december 2021.   exhibit a: father’s tender bundle containing subpoenaed material from nsw police, the mother’s psychologist, ms b, and region j local health district, (b) exhibit b: affidavit of dr f dated 15 december 2021 annexing his single expert report.   exhibit b: affidavit of dr f dated 15 december 2021 annexing his single expert report.
evidence
the mother’s affidavit
dates of consultation: ms. [hashemi] initially attended this service on 12th february 2021. she has attended a total of 16 sessions till date. dates of consultation are: 12/02/21, 11/03/21, 15/04/21, 04/06/21, 12/07/21, 13/08/21, 17/09/21, 01/11/21, 15/11/21, 29/11/21, 13/12/21, 04/02/22, 03/03/22, 25/03/22, 13/05/22, 03/06/22, 24/06/22 and 05/08/22. ms. [hashemi’s] next session is scheduled for 26/08/22. clinical presentation and mental state: ms. [hashemi] presented as a polite woman dressed in casual clothing. she needed prompting in engage in conversation. her speech was normal, however, she struggled to articulated herself clearly. she appeared tense and anxious when discussing the upcoming hearing. she reported an absence of visual and auditory hallucinations or delusional ideas. she appeared to be oriented in time and place, and had good insight with regards to her situation. ms. [hashemi] denied any presence of self-harm ideation. referral: ms. [hashemi] was initially referred to me by his gp [dr r] for assessment and management of her schizophrenia and managing her general mental health in the context of her history of domestic violence in her previous relationship and being separated from her children. ... symptoms and diagnosis: ms. [hashemi’s] symptoms include feeling as though the event is happening again, recurrent nightmares, feeling detached and withdrawn from people, difficulty concentrating, difficulty with sleep, feeling on guard, avoiding activities that remind her of her trauma, inability to remember parts of the most hurtful events, less interest in daily activities, feeling as if she doesn’t have a future, sudden emotional or physical reaction when reminded of the most hurtful or traumatic event, feeling that people do not understand what happened to her, blaming herself for things that have happened, feeling guilty of having survived, hopelessness, feeling shamed of the hurtful things that have happened, spending time thinking why these things happened, feeling like going insane, feeling like she is the only one that suffered these events, feeling that others are hostile to her, feeling that she has no one to rely on and feeling that someone she trusted betrayed her. these symptoms fulfil the dsm – v criteria for posttraumatic stress disorder. previous diagnosis or treatment: ms. [hashemi] has previously been diagnosed with schizophrenia and depression. she has previously been admitted to [o] hospital mental health. ms. [hashemi] was prescribed olanzpine 15mg and zoloft 50mg upon discharge. current treatment: ms. [hashemi] attends regular psychological sessions under the care of myself. she has agreed actively participate in therapy strategies and comply with any strategies and plans agreed to in session. ms. [hashemi] is complying with medication that has been prescribed by [dr r] or any psychiatrist she is seeing and monitor any changes. currently she is on olanzapine 10mg at night. the psychological sessions under my care focus on the following areas: management of depressive symptoms using cognitive behavioural therapy (cbt). cbt is a structured psychological treatment which recognises that cognitions and behaviours affect emotions. cbt is evidence based and has been shown to be the most effective way to reduce symptomatology for those experiencing posttraumatic stress disorder. cbt involves identifying thought and behaviour patterns that are either making you more likely to exacerbate symptoms, or stopping you from getting better when you’re experiencing symptoms. it works to change your thoughts and behaviour by teaching you to think rationally about common difficulties, helping you to shift negative or unhelpful thought patterns and reactions to a more realistic, positive and problem-solving approach. opinion: ms. [hashemi] requires ongoing psychological intervention to manage her symptoms. she has a good prognosis if she continues regular therapy sessions and complies with her medication requirements. however, her progress is impacted by the current family law matters and separation from her children. it is my opinion that ms. [hashemi] is highly motivated to improve her mental health. she is willing to engage in psychological interventions and is complaint with medication. she has good self-care and good insight into issues affecting her mental health. in my opinion she is not at risk for self-harm or harm to others. however, i believe being separated from her children has had a severe negative impact on her mental health.
143. during the 2021 covid lockdown we changed the location of visits to a park. in around october 2021 [mr latifa] then began letting the children spend time with me at my house unsupervised. [mr latifa] also allowed the children to stay with me longer on a saturday, usually until around 5.00pm. since february or march 2022 i began having telephone calls with the children. i speak to them every day i do not see them in person. i call them on [w]’s phone and she usually puts me on speaker phone. i usually speak to the children for about five minutes to check how their days were at school. i enjoy speaking to the children every day and hope this can continue.
the father’s affidavits
oral evidence of the mother
oral evidence of the father
single expert report of dr f
recommendations made relating to care and responsibility
option a: the children are graduated to more significant time with their mother including overnights.
option b: contact remains as is and parental responsibility is shared, with provisions.
oral evidence of the single expert report writer
mr hill: the mother, shortly thereafter, disengaged with her psychologist. can i get you to comment on her disengagement with her psychologist, and in the context of a family law proceedings, what does that mean?--- [dr f]: look, for someone with a chronic psychiatric or chronic mental health disorder like a diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia, i would find that deeply disturbing. but in the absence of comment from that psychologist as to the circumstances of termination, i’m not sure i can assist the court much other than to say anyone with a chronic mental health condition, such as a diagnosis of schizophrenia, the community mental health supports focus on a wraparound ongoing support program to ensure the capacity of that person to live independently in the community, knowing the high probability of relapse back to florid or psychotic states. and, clearly, [ms hashemi] has evidenced that on a number of occasions, as per the mental health history documentation before the court.   f]: so it is the period before the acute phase. and what it is characterised as is a constellation of negative symptoms. and i think this is particularly pertinent in this instance in the sense that the negative symptoms are characterised by a volition of loss of motivation, of loss of interest, of lack of concentration, of not wanting to leave the home, of being socially withdrawn and potentially evidencing personal neglect. my concern when you mapped out the characteristics of 2022, and his honour added in the changes to the contact regime, is a – question i now have is if we don’t have psychiatric oversight from february 2022, and we don’t have psychological oversight from october ‘22 – 2022, and i see from the documents that community health team – sorry, community mental health team discharged her i believe back in 2021. so unless i’m mistaken, the only support she has is her general practitioner. so i don’t know if the court has evidence of any form from that gp as to frequency and currency of contact with that person, but it may very well be the only professional that the mother is engaged in. that said, if i’m looking at the behavioural profile, and, obviously, within the context of family court matter, invariably, i am confronted with minority parents – minority care parents desperately seeking any time possible with their children. for an individual to actually not want a small portion of hours is very concerning. for a socially isolated individual not wanting a small portion of hours with their children, i would multiply that exponentially as deeply concerning. because, ostensibly, what else does this individual have left. and so in this prodromal phase...at a probabilistic level, the more socially withdrawn an individual becomes, obviously, the more socially isolated they are, the less stimulated they are. in the absence of stimulation, the brain will take over and fill that void. regrettably, some of that is fantastical or potentially psychotic. so the brain will introduce its own stimulation because this person is not being stimulated enough themselves. so that’s when the voices start to build up more. so potentially in the – in the negative phase we see the loss of motivation, the loss of interest, the loss of engagement in external social activities, a change in mood state, generally an increase in anger, an increase in resentment, possibly then leading to increasing noncompliance with medications. and then, as i said, the more positive symptoms, or we – we head from that prodromal phase into the acute phase, where the person is florid. mr hill: if i back you up, are you saying that in this phase the person becomes noncompliant with medication, or is it a factor that increases the risk of noncompliance? [dr f]: i prefer your latter...that all of those factors together keep building a greater likelihood for increasing noncompliance. there’s nobody to check on her, there’s nobody to remind her, there’s nobody just to touch base with her. so all of those factors are very important. i mean, all humans suffer the normal vagaries of memories. all humans can benefit with a gentle prompt and reminder from anybody about, “hey, you forgot this”, and, “how are you going?”. r u ok? day, for example. all of those issues are about the importance of humans connecting and reconnecting with humans. we need that to actually ensure ongoing stable function.   f]: just i would ask the court to take into consideration, obviously, the fact that that affidavit is august 2022. the mother had not had any consultation with a psychiatrist since february of 2022. the evidence being put forward is that there was a decision to decrease her antipsychotic medication in august. from october 2022, the court appears to have evidence that she has ceased contact with her psychologist and her mental health social worker. then made the decision to effectively her contact hours with her children in the period subsequent. i think the court needs to be open to the prospect that any reduction in antipsychotic medication is potentially bringing forward a resurgence of clinical or potentially subclinical symptoms associated with the underlying problem. whether that is consistent with the features of the events surrounding 26 november or not, i will leave open for the court to review. but i think there’s a timeline of factors that the court needs to keep in active awareness.   f]: so i think – i think the court can place weight on that. that said, i’m not in a position to advise the court on the children’s reaction to their departure from their mother on the 26th of november last year, and how profound an impact that has had. but that, coupled with what i understand to be the mother’s noncontact with the children for the next two months at least – more than two months, the children would integrate as part of their previous awareness of their mother’s abandonment of them, and the interviews i conducted with the children individually each identified their experiences of mother has – “my mother has left me. abandoned me”. i note for the court that i left that open as to how much the father may or may not have contributed to that, but, that said, there was still a strong feeling from the children that their mother had left them, which, regrettably, appears to have been replicated against most recently. so i can’t assist the court on the willingness now of the children to see their mum, and that – that bit’s going to be of enormous import to weighing care decisions for the future. and, obviously, whatever care decision the court reaches for, it must be incredibly incremental at this point, because the children, following their fearful departure, as – as recorded through the affidavit of the father, they’re going to be very reluctant, at best, to return to mum, be that in a park, much less to her apartment.
his honour: but if you assume for the moment that the mother’s adverse conduct in front of the children and towards the father on 26 november 2022 was, indeed, borne out of her anger and frustration at not being able to achieve overnight time with the children, what is the relevance of that? if that’s the correct characterisation of the – of what led to the mother’s conduct that day? [dr f]: i’m open to – to assuming that from the outset. however, i wouldn’t assume it as an isolated incident. i would only assume it within the context of a greater timeline, and hence why i mapped out for the court the need to be aware of what has happened since her affidavit of 19 august. and in that context, the medications have gone down, the contact with independent clinical supports by...report has ceased. by her own choice, reportedly, she reduced contact with the very children that she was wanting by 50 per cent. the notion that there was a critical incident on 26 november i will accept, but i don’t think it’s decontextualised to all those other factors. and, equally, that’s been the very issue since – for the last three years since her return to australia in 2019. so for it to suddenly rear up and by dealt with isolated, i don’t think is – is a valid approach. and i think, clinically, it may be more indicative of that individual’s decreasing ability to emotionally regulate. to actually manage her own stresses and emotions and, obviously, in line with that, her own internal dialogue, of which she may or may not be aware, and that level of reactivity to it. so there appeared to have been a persisting – forgive me, a – a carrying on conflict with the children about their ipads and possession of the ipads and return of the ipads for time before 26 november, and that was part and parcel of that conflict as well. so it seemed to be multilayered and multiperson. so, again, the question of – the bigger question is what was happening inside her in terms of her failure to manage herself and regulate herself, especially at a time in front of the children. ... mr hill: and there was a threat made by the mother of walking away if she didn’t get the proposed orders. now, if the mother was to engage with correct psychological treatment, is it likely that – and if his honour made incremental time for the children, is it likely that the mother would disengage with the children? is it possible to give an opinion on that?--- [dr f]: i think the court can only look to the history it has got at the moment and that is a parent that is using her engagement with the children bizarrely and potentially illogically as some sort of weapon from her perspective in her efforts to manage that conflict, but what it also highlights to myself as a clinician and to the court is that the mother is disregarding the emotional impact of that decision on the children and focusing more so on her own needs which, in and of itself, is one of the hallmarks of impaired parenting capacity where that parent is unable to subjugate their needs and instead prioritise the needs of the children. so i’m still back to all of the current behavioural indicators that i’m getting are more signs of a decreasing or potentially deteriorating mental health profile rather than an improving one.   f]: i certainly do find that concerning, having conducted way too many of such assessments. so the potential risk, obviously, is that one parent holds complete power, and the other parent is, effectively, completely disenfranchised and has zero power. the prospect of that being nothing, as in zero contact, i think the court has evidence of it as at this date, from november 26, 2022 through to today. so in and of itself, that prospect, as presented, if it’s living out on a day to day basis, is not a good sign now. so as a clinician, my advice to the court would be that’s not a good option to be looking at.
his honour: so in this case, doctor, would an ideal situation be this in terms of a situation that would promote the children being reintroduced to the mother and, thereafter, spending meaningful time with her, that the mother returns to regular consultations with her psychiatrist, psychologist, she sees the social worker regularly, and i think in your report you mentioned the mother continuing to learn english? [dr f]: that’s critical, your honour. absolutely critical.
his honour: sorry. do you want to ask some more questions? [ms hashemi]: no. but i do not want gradual. i don’t want to start from the beginning. [dr f]: no?---all i can say is i hear that with great sadness because to me it means that four children pay the price for that decision. [ms hashemi]: why...the children – why it’s bad for the children? how? [dr f]: they have not seen you since november of last year, and for every day that goes on it makes it that much harder for them to reconnect with you. [ms hashemi]: i don’t want to see them. i don’t want to talk to them until and unless it becomes three nights per week. what is the point of this...it just mix everything up. what is the point of seeing them during day and leaving at night? [dr f]: i will leave that for you to talk to the judge about. [ms hashemi]: since i was happy for sometimes i used to see the children at the shopping centre. i got a place. i got ready, but everything was just ruined. everything is ruined now and i don’t want to start again slowly. [dr f]: but what if your psychologist or your mental health social worker, [ms d], or your psychiatrist, the doctor, said that would be the best approach from the children’s perspective. would that change your mind? [ms hashemi]: you mean slowly? [dr f]: yes. [ms hashemi]: no. [dr f]: i leave that before the court. his honour: i mean, ma’am, if you think the children could emotionally cope with going from daytime time during, in particular, last year, no overnight time, then no time since 26 november last year to date, if you think the children could cope with suddenly spending three nights a week with you overnight, well, ask the doctor whether he agrees. [ms hashemi]: no, not really, but it’s not good not to see them. ... [dr f]: then why is it you choose not to see them? [ms hashemi]: because i want it to be three nights every week. [dr f]: little children do not understand that. little children just have an absent mother. [ms hashemi]: i don’t like to start again slowly or gradually. i want it to be three nights every week. [dr f]: i hear that, but i think his honour and i have both said my focus is on the children and the children will adjust better if any change is undertaken slowly. [ms hashemi]: it has already been four years of slow progress. if it had worked it would not have come to this point. [dr f]: i understand that, but at this point it’s not suggesting it is working. at this point it is suggesting things are getting worse. so that means the impact on the children is getting bigger, but that’s a negative impact. [ms hashemi]: why is that bad for the children to spend three nights every week with their mother? [dr f]: because from their experience with their mother when her mental health has been bad, they are scared. so they need to be prepared for that carefully for the mother to demonstrate that her mental health is good. the difficulty now is that the mother is not talking and not seeing any of her mental health professionals. [ms hashemi]: i don’t want to see the children slowly. [dr f]: she needs to understand that that decision hurts her children. [ms hashemi]: it’s not hurtful. it’s not bad. ... [dr f]: all i can say is with that answer to me as a doctor it tells me how important it is for the mother to go and see [ms b] and [ms d] and the psychiatrist again, because all of those people need her – need to help her to think about that view.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the children
section 60cc considerations a) (the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration) ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant. in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92 at [121] the full court accepted as appropriate this interpretation by brown j of “meaningful relationship”.  b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
section 60cc(3) additional considerations a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views (b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents, and any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family. k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter. l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child.  m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
parental responsibility and equal time
summary
associate: dated: 23 february 2023
dated: 23 february 2023