last updated: 18 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hua & jiang [2023] fedcfamc2f 197
orders
the court orders that:  approaching, contacting or attempting to contact the mother and/or x except as otherwise provided in the orders or otherwise agreed to in writing between the parties, (b) entering or attempting to enter any place where x attends school, after school care or vacation care, including travel to and from school, (c) entering or attempting to enter, or attending at any extracurricular activity attended by x, (d) assaulting, molesting, harassing, threatening or stalking the mother and/or x.   entering or attempting to enter any place where x attends school, after school care or vacation care, including travel to and from school, (c) entering or attempting to enter, or attending at any extracurricular activity attended by x, (d) assaulting, molesting, harassing, threatening or stalking the mother and/or x.   entering or attempting to enter, or attending at any extracurricular activity attended by x, (d) assaulting, molesting, harassing, threatening or stalking the mother and/or x.   assaulting, molesting, harassing, threatening or stalking the mother and/or x.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
material relied upon  amended initiating application filed 13 january 2023, (b) his affidavits filed 9 october 2020 and 13 january 2023, (c) his tender bundle.   his affidavits filed 9 october 2020 and 13 january 2023, (c) his tender bundle.   his tender bundle.   amended response filed 4 august 2022, (b) her affidavits filed 28 january 2020, 5 may 2020 and 4 august 2022, (c) family report dated 5 october 2021, (d) child inclusive conference (“cic”) memorandum dated 22 february 2020.   her affidavits filed 28 january 2020, 5 may 2020 and 4 august 2022, (c) family report dated 5 october 2021, (d) child inclusive conference (“cic”) memorandum dated 22 february 2020.   family report dated 5 october 2021, (d) child inclusive conference (“cic”) memorandum dated 22 february 2020.   child inclusive conference (“cic”) memorandum dated 22 february 2020.   family report dated 5 october 2021, (b) cic memorandum dated 22 february 2020.   cic memorandum dated 22 february 2020.
exhibits  exhibit a: father’s tender bundle (i) district court outcome dated 23 may 2019, (ii) summary of school meeting dated 9 august 2019, (iii) microsoft family program report from 2019, (iv) x’s school report for year 11 semester 1, 2022, (v) x’s school report for year 11 semester 2, 2022, (b) exhibit b: family report dated 5 october 2021 and cic memorandum dated 22 february 2020.   district court outcome dated 23 may 2019, (ii) summary of school meeting dated 9 august 2019, (iii) microsoft family program report from 2019, (iv) x’s school report for year 11 semester 1, 2022, (v) x’s school report for year 11 semester 2, 2022,  ) summary of school meeting dated 9 august 2019, (iii) microsoft family program report from 2019, (iv) x’s school report for year 11 semester 1, 2022, (v) x’s school report for year 11 semester 2, 2022,  i) microsoft family program report from 2019, (iv) x’s school report for year 11 semester 1, 2022, (v) x’s school report for year 11 semester 2, 2022,  ) x’s school report for year 11 semester 1, 2022, (v) x’s school report for year 11 semester 2, 2022,   x’s school report for year 11 semester 2, 2022,   exhibit b: family report dated 5 october 2021 and cic memorandum dated 22 february 2020.
evidence
affidavits of the mother
oral evidence of the father
oral evidence of the mother
the child inclusive conference
you’re looking for death, and you are the baddest of the bad, you have mental problems, you are insane, you should go to mental hospital, you are the terrorist, you have made me have bad disease and high blood pressure.
the family report  hua] was contacted several times but appeared unable to understand the purpose of the interview, believing instead that the family consultant was attempting to move the date of the directions hearing scheduled for 8 october 2021. as the same family consultant completed the child inclusive conference on 22 february 2020, it was possible to use information obtained gained from this assessment to inform this report. information from [mr hua]’s affidavit filed 6 september 2019 was also used to inform this report. due to the 2021 covid restrictions, it was not possible to complete formal parent-child observations. [x], however, was observed briefly, by video, in the presence of [ms jiang], which provided some information about the nature of his relationship with [ms jiang].
mr reeves: beyond embarrassment, is there some other effect on [x]that you can identify which makes you think these restraints are necessary? [ms e]: it would hinder [x] in terms of not only attending events with his peers or extracurricular activities or schooling, but also his ability to thrive in those environments. developmentally, he’s of the age where his growing independence is extremely important and that should not be compromised in any way. both his attendance and his ability to feel comfort. and, also, not to have any lingering effect of discomfort. so if he’s on his way to school and his way to school is interrupted by his father, not only during that time that he could be emotionally or psychologically affected, but that could linger with him for the rest of the school day, affecting his ability to fully participate in school and with his friends.
mr reeves: i see. so in your view, if the parents had shared parental responsibility, would they be able to make joint decisions in respect of [x]? [ms e]: no, they would not. mr reeves: and would the very fact of them being required to make joint decisions have a deleterious effect on [x]? [ms e]: yes, it would.
mr mando: yes. i don’t disagree with you that you probably tried to contact [mr hua]. but, because you weren’t able to speak to him, you would have to agree with me that that would be a problem in relation to your report, wouldn’t you? [ms e]: it – yes. it wasn’t ideal. mr mando: yes. and it’s the case – so did you try to reschedule an interview with [mr hua]?--- [ms e]: yes. i will just have a look at my report. i made many attempts to schedule an appointment with him. ... mr mando: why didn’t you wait until you were finally able to interview [mr hua] before you issued your report? [ms e]: well, after making several attempts to contact [mr hua], he didn’t appear able to understand the process. so it was quite clear that an interview wasn’t going to occur.
mr galapo: and what do you mean by that exactly? what did you mean when you wrote it?--- [ms e]: what i mean – what i mean by that is [mr hua]’s behaviour is not responsive to [x]’s emotional needs. and, from that perspective, he is being intrusive and is being emotionally harmful by preventing [x] – he’s constraining [x] from doing the things that he developmentally should be and needs to be doing at his age and stage of development. so as i said earlier, going to school, achieving in school, passing exams. he has a focus on his schoolwork and the things that he is good at. apparently, he’s very good at art. being happy, growing, being with friends, just having freedom of movement is very important for his age.
mr galapo: what do you mean by that, [ms e]? what did you mean? [ms e]: yes. what i specifically mean by that is [x] spoke about, for example, not being able to leave home to go to school in the morning for up to – from my memory, for up to two hours because [mr hua] was present. that that is a huge amount of time to be missing from the school day. and he – [x], i recall, said something about it doesn’t make your school record look good. so even [x], as a young person, was really disappointed that that was happening to him. so this is a young person who clearly wanted to go to school and [mr hua]’s behaviour is actually preventing him from going to school. that in and of itself, as a very simple piece of behaviour, is very concerning. mr galapo: thank you. and that would be corroborated or is consistent with paragraph 58, where you say:
[mr hua]’s current behaviour appears to be also impacting on [x]’s social development, including his ability to join friends in shared activities or play sports in a timely way.
is that correct? is that similar to what you’ve discussed just?--- [ms e]: yes, that’s correct. and, as i think i’ve already mentioned, not just the physical constraint. it’s the subsequent impact on that and the emotional impact on [x]. his social development as well, psychological development, his educational development, his opportunity to achieve the best he can in school so he can have the best life opportunities.
mr galapo: can you just elaborate a bit more about why you said that?--- [ms e]: i think [x] is of – i noticed a change in [x] from when i did the child impact report to the family report. he had emotionally and psychologically matured. in this report, he was very angry at his father. in the family report, he was able to understand – he felt – he felt some distress about his father’s behaviour for his father’s sake. however, that even compromises [x] further because it’s putting a responsibility on him to worry about the adults in his life when he should be free to live his life and not have to make adjustments to his life to meet the needs of the adults around him or even be emotionally impacted about that. so have to adjust his life to not go out and have to stay home or do the things that young people within his social group are doing. so he was straying from that. and then the effect on his emotional and psychological state of knowing that he then had to run away, avoid his father, the multiple emotions that he would be feeling, plus the fact that he spoke about the fact that his father – that he recognises that his father is trying to help. but he also recognises that his health is not functional. so that causes him distress, shame, and embarrassment as well. and the fact that his father then also engages within his peer group is doubly shaming for him.
mr galapo: and it goes on. can you elaborate a bit more about why you believe this? why you believe this?--- [ms e]: it takes the responsibility away from [x]...it takes irresponsibility away from [x] because he’s not having to manage the situation or any decision making. when orders are made and the adults follow them, it’s there, it relieves that burden from the child. it was also a practical solution as well because it did appear that they did have an effect. that the child (sic father) did abide by them to a certain extent. mr galapo: so according to you...it’s very important that the injunction stays in place, correct? [ms e]: yes.
mr galapo: why do you say that? is it his age? is it more his maturity? is it both? [ms e]: yes, it’s his development. so he was able to look – he was – he certainly seemed to have moved away from that egocentric kind of development that adolescents often sit in for a period of time. so he was quite mature. and so the fact that he was able to consider everything and still identify that his father’s involvement in his life at that time, unless it changes, was having a detrimental effect on him.
mr galapo: and regarding the injunction, you’ve actually – in paragraph 62, you’re recommending that the court make an injunction that [mr hua] is restrained from approaching [ms jiang] and [x] at home and from approaching [x] at school and any activities he attends. and also, that he’s restrained from approaching [x] while he’s travelling to and from school and any activities that he attends. and that should stay in place until [x] is 18. can you just also explain a bit more about why you’ve said that, why you’ve recommended that? [ms e]: well, in addition to the reasons i’ve said, which is the burden on [x] should be lifted for having to manage the adults in his life and the need for him to have emotional and psychological space and eating to develop and have the best outcomes possible, the other flip side of that is, if [x] is given the best opportunity to develop with the best outcomes, then as a young adult or as an adult, he will actually be in a better place to have some type of relationship with his father, even if that is on his own terms, rather than him have all of these negative impacts happen to him now. he doesn’t have the best opportunity to grow up to be a functional, healthy adult who is able to make his own decisions, keep himself safe, and know what a healthy relationship is. in that way, [mr hua] would have a better chance in the future to have some kind of relationship with his son. whereas if he continues to intrude on his life now, it will continue to create problems, not only for [x], but also in the parent-child relationship. mr galapo: so essentially, what you’re saying is that, in the child’s best interest, it would be detrimental if the father continues intruding on his life for at least, you know – in that year or year and a half until he becomes 18 years of age, if there’s any issues with the intrusion now, it will actually backfire against the father because [x] will have a lot of resentment towards the father, correct? [ms e]: yes, absolutely.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the child
section 60cc considerations
subsection (2a): the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration
subsection (2b): the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
section 60cc(3) - additional considerations  any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child  the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant  if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter  whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility
proposed restraining orders against the father under section 68b of the act
father’s proposed miscellaneous parenting orders
summary
associate: dated: 23 february 2023
dated: 23 february 2023