last updated: 18 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
massi & kerbouche [2023] fedcfamc2f 190
orders
the court orders that:
1.1 ordinary living expenses, 1.2 water, electricity, phone, internet, vehicle expenses, 1.3 reasonable purchases made by way of credit or debit card. for the purposes of order 1, the scope of the injunction may be varied with the consent of the applicant. that the applicant provide the usual undertaking as to damages. that to the extent they are sought against the first respondent in the amended application in a case dated 2 december 2021 be dismissed. that, without admission, the second respondent be restrained by injunction from transferring funds from any bank account held in his name or jointly with another person to an account held by a third party in australia or overseas, except for the following purposes: 5.1 ordinary living expenses, 5.2 expenses associated with his children’s schooling, tutoring or extracurricular activities, 5.3 to tax, mortgage, rates, water, electricity, phone, internet, vehicle expenses, 5.4 reasonable purchases made by way of credit or debit card, that upon the settlement of [b street, suburb c], the second respondent shall direct that the proceeds of sale be deposited into his personal bank account and the injunction shall continue to apply with respect to order 1. for the purposes of order 1, the scope of the injunction may be varied with the consent of the applicant. that the applicant provide the usual undertaking as to damages. that to the extent they are sought against the second respondent orders 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, 14 and 15 of the amended application in a case dated 2 december 2021 be dismissed.
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction
the issues for determination
background
the competing proposals
the alleged loans
her honour: she concedes then that with respect to those three sums of money that there was an agreement between the respondents that at some time the first respondent would pay the second respondent back when he could? counsel for the wife: when he was in a position to, yes. i’m trying to remember his exact words, and i’ve wrote them down, but i can’t – the exact words that he put in his affidavit.
if it’s a legal loan agreement, it’s legal in [country e] and not enforceable in new south wales. if it’s a loan agreement made in new south wales, it’s not a legal document. the best it can be is an indication of a loan, we will say. it’s not a document that’s made in australia. it’s not a legal document – it’s not an australian legal document, if it was an australian legal document it would have complied with the external witness act which means that if you signed for it in a separate area, it has to be attested onto the document itself, which it wasn’t.
yes, you can take as being a loan that has been – that – you would have to decide whether has to be repaid or not, but it can’t be enforced in australia that’s all...... if money is advanced and it’s supposed to be returned and it’s taken to be like a loan, then it becomes an obligation to repay, not an enforcement to repay.
if it’s true that it’s owed, it’s owed.... but i can’t make any comment on the loans themselves, other than there is an obligation to pay and if the court feels that that obligation should be met, then it should be met...... but....... all the amounts prior to that were not based on that they needed to be repaid, and so all i can say is that these amounts may, in fact, be under that same obligation. if that sounds unclear, i can make it clear on the basis that the obligation is to pay ‘when you’re able to’, but there is no penalty.
the wife doesn’t know anything about this. that’s her evidence. ‘i wasn’t aware of the loans. i wasn’t aware of anything.’ so all we can deal with is the documentary proof that is given to us by the first and second respondents, and if they don’t get the proof that would be enough to show that money was lent... the amount that they allege are lent, then they should fail in that regard.
the agreements are not valid agreements in australia and the best they can be held is that the agreement indicates an obligation that the husband should repay the seventeen odd thousand dollars which she has- if you like, he has given 5000, but that need not have been repayment of any loan. it just may have been that he advanced second respondent $5000... in fact, the loan agreement is not a loan agreement, it’s just an indication of an obligation to pay back monies advanced.
the law  make findings as to the identity and value of the property (including superannuation interests), liabilities, and financial resources of the parties, or either of them, at the time of the final hearing, and determine the legal and equitable interests of the parties in such property, (b) consider, identify and assess the contributions by the parties to the acquisition, conservation and/or improvement of their property, including financial and non-financial contributions and any contributions to the welfare of the family before, during and after the relationship came to an end, and (c) after consideration of altering the interests in the property pool on the basis of contributions, to consider whether there should be any further adjustment to either of the parties on account of the matters set out in s 79(4)(d)-(g) of the act, including any relevant considerations under s 75(2), and (d) ensure that any order made is just and equitable.   consider, identify and assess the contributions by the parties to the acquisition, conservation and/or improvement of their property, including financial and non-financial contributions and any contributions to the welfare of the family before, during and after the relationship came to an end, and (c) after consideration of altering the interests in the property pool on the basis of contributions, to consider whether there should be any further adjustment to either of the parties on account of the matters set out in s 79(4)(d)-(g) of the act, including any relevant considerations under s 75(2), and (d) ensure that any order made is just and equitable.   after consideration of altering the interests in the property pool on the basis of contributions, to consider whether there should be any further adjustment to either of the parties on account of the matters set out in s 79(4)(d)-(g) of the act, including any relevant considerations under s 75(2), and (d) ensure that any order made is just and equitable.   ensure that any order made is just and equitable.
the balance sheet
balance sheet determinations
notional addbacks
item 5 – addback against the husband of $293,940 being the proceeds of sale of the two tasmanian properties   whether there were agreements for loans as alleged, (b) if so, when were those agreements were made, and (c) the terms of the loans.   if so, when were those agreements were made, and (c) the terms of the loans.   the terms of the loans.
payment to the second respondent of $119,350
further payments were made from my wife’s account to [mr kerbouche] account to make up to agreed loan amount: on 18 may 2018, my wife gave [mr kerbouche] $5,000 in cash, on i october 2019, my wife transferred $5,000 by electronic transfer, on 9 october 2019, my wife transferred $2,000 by electronic transfer.
he never told me how much he was earning. he never showed me his bank accounts but he used to get money out of eftpos.
payment to mr l of $46,000
date
mode of receiving
amount (aud)
3 october 2019
cash deposit in bank account
$5,000
8 october 2019
$1,900
$8,100
11 october 2019
$10,000
14 october 2019
15 october 2019
$4,000
$1,000
total
$36,000
payment to mr r of $35,000
i did not have a written loan agreement with my father [mr q] or [mr r] however, there was an oral agreement based on the following terms:   r]: i. principle amount: $35,000 ii. interest: 10%. iii. repayment period: 3 years.
$5,500
25 october 2019
cash
$8,500
5 november 2019
$11,000
13 may 2020
$35,000
payment to mr q of $60,000   q]: i. principle amount: $60,000 ii. interest: 10%. iii. repayment period: 3 years.
monies received by the husband of $33,539
it’s my usual practice not to take the parties legal costs into account. this is not to indicate that they lack reality but they can just inject a false dimension into property proceedings. the true picture is least distorted by ignoring the parties’ legal costs.
item 6: proceeds of sale of the motor vehicle 1 of $4,500
liabilities
item 9: monies owing to company o
item 12: loan balance to the second respondent
whether an order altering property interests should be made
conclusion
associate: dated: 24 february 2023
dated: 24 february 2023
[1] husband’s affidavit, paragraph 35. [2] second respondent’s affidavit paragraph 45. [3] husband affidavit paragraph 120 to 122. [4] husband affidavit paragraph 124. [5] husband affidavit, paragraph 27. [6] husband affidavit, annexure j. [7] husband affidavit, annexure f.