last updated: 18 april 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hafey & hafey [2023] fedcfamc2f 192
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland  the parties to exercise equal shared parental responsibility, (b) x to live with the mother, (c) during school term x spends time with his father from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school monday, and the second week from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday, and (d) the parents share school holidays equally.   x to live with the mother, (c) during school term x spends time with his father from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school monday, and the second week from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday, and (d) the parents share school holidays equally.   during school term x spends time with his father from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school monday, and the second week from the conclusion of school thursday until the commencement of school friday, and (d) the parents share school holidays equally.   the parents share school holidays equally.
final consent orders and rice & asplund arguments
the principles which, in my view, should apply in such cases are that the court should have regard to any earlier order into the reasons for material on which that order was based. it should not lightly entertain an application to reverse an earlier custody order. to do so would be to invite endless litigation... change is an ever present factor in human affairs. therefore, the court would need to be satisfied by the applicant that... there is some changed circumstance which will justify such a serious step, some new factor arising or, at any rate, some factor which was not disclosed at the previous hearing which would have been material.
choice of school for x
the father’s compliants about school refusal and performance
father’s complaints about changeovers
child support payment
ms c’s contact via social media  has an unlocked instagram account that i’m not comfortable with. anyone can access that. indeed, he has been cyber bullied as well with that account. i can’t stop, as much as i’ve tried, [ms c] [sic] from creating new accounts and, therefore, continuing. i do know that [x] has blocked those accounts when they arrive. i’ve tried.
dr j’s evidence
“[the father] effectively compromised the relationship by starting another family in [country b], it is remarkable that there has been any level of functionality between himself and [the mother], which is a credit to her maturity and focus on what is best for [x].”
discussion of applicable legal principles & conclusion
associate: dated: 24 february 2023
dated: 24 february 2023
[1] the esafety commissioner website: https://www.esafety.gov.au/ has a range of resources for parents to help them keep children safe online.