last updated: 15 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
kannan & kannan [2023] fedcfamc2f 226
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility  advise the mother prior to any decision made concerning the children in his exercise of sole parental responsibility, (b) allow the mother at least seven (7) days to consider the father’s proposal and respond in writing to the father, and (c) take into consideration any views expressed by the mother prior to making a final decision.   allow the mother at least seven (7) days to consider the father’s proposal and respond in writing to the father, and (c) take into consideration any views expressed by the mother prior to making a final decision.   take into consideration any views expressed by the mother prior to making a final decision.
live with and spend time  week 1: from the conclusion of school (or 3pm if a non-school day) on wednesday until 6pm on thursday, (b) week 2: from after school the conclusion of school on friday (or 3pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school (or 8am if non-school day) on the following monday, and (c) such other times as agreed between the parties in writing from time-to-time.   week 2: from after school the conclusion of school on friday (or 3pm if a non-school day) until the commencement of school (or 8am if non-school day) on the following monday, and (c) such other times as agreed between the parties in writing from time-to-time.   such other times as agreed between the parties in writing from time-to-time.
school holidays   during term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays from the conclusion of the last day of school until 4pm on the middle saturday of the school holidays, and (b) during term 4 school holidays from 10am on the first saturday of the school holidays for 7 days, and then each alternate week thereafter for a period of 7 days.   during term 4 school holidays from 10am on the first saturday of the school holidays for 7 days, and then each alternate week thereafter for a period of 7 days.   in even numbered years for the first half of each school holiday period commencing on from the conclusion of the last day of school until 10am on the middle saturday of the school holiday period, and (b) in odd numbered years for the second half of each school holiday period commencing at 10am on the middle saturday of the school holiday period to 4pm on the last day of the school holiday period.   in odd numbered years for the second half of each school holiday period commencing at 10am on the middle saturday of the school holiday period to 4pm on the last day of the school holiday period.
special occasions  with the mother, from 9am until 5pm, on mother’s day, (b) with the father, from 9am until 5pm until on father’s day, (c) with the mother on the mother’s birthday from the conclusion of school until 6pm or if on a non-school day, then from 9am until 5pm. (d) with the father on the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school until 6pm or if on a non-school day, then from 9am until 5pm. (e) with the party not otherwise spending time with the children on their respective birthdays where the children shall move together between the parties and not individually: (i) from the conclusion of school until 6pm, or (ii) if a non-school day, from 11am until 2pm.   with the father, from 9am until 5pm until on father’s day, (c) with the mother on the mother’s birthday from the conclusion of school until 6pm or if on a non-school day, then from 9am until 5pm. (d) with the father on the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school until 6pm or if on a non-school day, then from 9am until 5pm. (e) with the party not otherwise spending time with the children on their respective birthdays where the children shall move together between the parties and not individually: (i) from the conclusion of school until 6pm, or (ii) if a non-school day, from 11am until 2pm.   with the mother on the mother’s birthday from the conclusion of school until 6pm or if on a non-school day, then from 9am until 5pm. (d) with the father on the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school until 6pm or if on a non-school day, then from 9am until 5pm. (e) with the party not otherwise spending time with the children on their respective birthdays where the children shall move together between the parties and not individually: (i) from the conclusion of school until 6pm, or (ii) if a non-school day, from 11am until 2pm.   with the father on the father’s birthday, from the conclusion of school until 6pm or if on a non-school day, then from 9am until 5pm. (e) with the party not otherwise spending time with the children on their respective birthdays where the children shall move together between the parties and not individually: (i) from the conclusion of school until 6pm, or (ii) if a non-school day, from 11am until 2pm.   with the party not otherwise spending time with the children on their respective birthdays where the children shall move together between the parties and not individually: (i) from the conclusion of school until 6pm, or (ii) if a non-school day, from 11am until 2pm.   from the conclusion of school until 6pm, or (ii) if a non-school day, from 11am until 2pm.  ) if a non-school day, from 11am until 2pm.
communication
changeover
international travel (section 65y)   such travel shall take place only during the children's school holiday periods they are spending with the travelling party pursuant to these orders or during a period that includes religious celebrations overseas, (b) the travelling party shall provide the other party details of their proposed travel, including an itinerary and details of where the children will be staying and how they will be able to be contacted during the period of travel, not less than six weeks prior to the intended departure date, (c) the travelling party shall provide copies of his or her and the children's flight tickets to the other party not less than two weeks prior to the intended departure date, (d) the travelling party shall facilitate telephone communication between the non-travelling party and the children not less than two times per week of travel, and (e) the non-travelling party shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary as requested by the travelling party within seven days of a request so as to facilitate the children's intended travel, subject to compliance with orders 11(a) – 11(c) herein.   the travelling party shall provide the other party details of their proposed travel, including an itinerary and details of where the children will be staying and how they will be able to be contacted during the period of travel, not less than six weeks prior to the intended departure date, (c) the travelling party shall provide copies of his or her and the children's flight tickets to the other party not less than two weeks prior to the intended departure date, (d) the travelling party shall facilitate telephone communication between the non-travelling party and the children not less than two times per week of travel, and (e) the non-travelling party shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary as requested by the travelling party within seven days of a request so as to facilitate the children's intended travel, subject to compliance with orders 11(a) – 11(c) herein.   the travelling party shall provide copies of his or her and the children's flight tickets to the other party not less than two weeks prior to the intended departure date, (d) the travelling party shall facilitate telephone communication between the non-travelling party and the children not less than two times per week of travel, and (e) the non-travelling party shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary as requested by the travelling party within seven days of a request so as to facilitate the children's intended travel, subject to compliance with orders 11(a) – 11(c) herein.   the travelling party shall facilitate telephone communication between the non-travelling party and the children not less than two times per week of travel, and (e) the non-travelling party shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary as requested by the travelling party within seven days of a request so as to facilitate the children's intended travel, subject to compliance with orders 11(a) – 11(c) herein.   the non-travelling party shall do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary as requested by the travelling party within seven days of a request so as to facilitate the children's intended travel, subject to compliance with orders 11(a) – 11(c) herein.
miscellaneous
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge obradovic
introduction
issues for determination  has a history of making serious and unfounded allegations against the father which negatively affects the children, (b) has a tendency to not comply with court orders with relation to existing spend time provisions, and (c) does not have a capacity to support the children’s relationship with their father.   has a tendency to not comply with court orders with relation to existing spend time provisions, and (c) does not have a capacity to support the children’s relationship with their father.   does not have a capacity to support the children’s relationship with their father.   whether the mother’s allegations against the father pose an unacceptable risk of harm for the children when in the care of the father, (b) whether the mother’s continued allegations against the father and her parenting capacity pose an unacceptable risk of harm for the children when in the care of the mother, (c) each party’s ability to comply with court orders and facilitate the relationship with the other parent, and (d) subsequently, the allocation of parental responsibility and whom the children should live with and spend time with.   whether the mother’s continued allegations against the father and her parenting capacity pose an unacceptable risk of harm for the children when in the care of the mother, (c) each party’s ability to comply with court orders and facilitate the relationship with the other parent, and (d) subsequently, the allocation of parental responsibility and whom the children should live with and spend time with.   each party’s ability to comply with court orders and facilitate the relationship with the other parent, and (d) subsequently, the allocation of parental responsibility and whom the children should live with and spend time with.   subsequently, the allocation of parental responsibility and whom the children should live with and spend time with.
relevant legal principles
the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion... the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interests, which entails an exercise of discretion. that discretionary judgment is influenced by the various material considerations enumerated within s 60cc of the act, of which the evidence-based finding made about the existence of any unacceptable risk of harm is but one.[10]
determination
relevant facts
credit and findings
examples of the mother’s implausible and contradictory evidence
court’s reasons for judgment in kannan & kannan [2021] fcca 1359
affidavit of 26 february 2021 ... [63] on sunday, 29 november 2020 the children spent unsupervised time with the father for the first and only time after the making of the orders on 27 november 2020. [64] the mother says that after the children’s time with the father, [y] was not behaving like she usually did and that [x] had told her “papa was changing [y’s] clothes and her nappy and [y] was crying a lot”. apparently, that night [y] did not sleep well which was unusual for her. she then saw a photograph of the children with the father and the paternal grandmother on whatsapp, in which [y] was wearing different clothing to that which the mother had dressed her in that morning. the mother said that the picture caused her concern, “given the way that i had dressed her for the visit, there was no reason or the father to take [y’s] clothes off”. [65] the following day the mother noticed [y] to continue to act strangely. she noticed redness around her vagina, and [y] attempting to put toys down the back of her pants, something she had not done before. [y] was also apparently making “unusual circular movement with her hip”, and was unable to pass her stool, grabbing her stomach and making strange noises. [66] [in late] 2020, the mother observed [y], while [y] was in the shower, put her finger into her vagina, jabbing her finger in. this she had not observed the child to do before. the mother then goes on to say that she tried to put a toy in her bottom, something which she had also never done before. [67] the mother called the child protection helpline and was apparently told “this is sexual abuse” and to stop contact between the children and the father until further notice. she called the child protection line on two other occasions over the following two days, and was apparently told not to make the children available to spend time with the father. [68] [in late] 2020, the mother made a report to the police. she says she was told that if she had concerns to take the child to a doctor. [69] the mother did not make the children available to spend time with the father on 2 december 2020. [70] [a short time later], the mother called the dcj. she says that she was told on that occasion that the dcj was not running an investigation into the matter. that same day, the dcj emailed the mother’s solicitor and advised as follows:
i am aware that today the father has been provided a (sic) email that indicates that dcj are completing an assessment and that we have advised the mother that the children are not to have contact with him during the assessment. i confirm that this is not true... the mother asked for a letter stating that the children could not have contact and that she did not agree with the father have any contact in the first place. i confirm that i told the mother that we could not provide the letter and that she should seek legal advice... at no time was the mother told that we would be completing the investigation. i also told her that we would not tell her that the children could or could not have contact with the father and she needed to seek legal advice regarding this. i have spoken to the father and his partner today... i confirm that i told them that the dcj are not completing an investigation and that dcj also did not advise that the children should not have contact.  ] also annexed to the mother’s affidavit is a referral to [dr l] from the [city g medical centre] indicating that [y] has “signs and symptoms of [a medical condition]. however the mother is worried about possible abuse by the father.” while there is no explanation as to what [this medical condition] is in the doctor’s referral, there is no indication of any concern of sexual or other abuse of the child, by the medical practitioner who appears to have examined the child. it is inferred that it is likely that the medical practitioner explained the nature of the inflammation to the mother and that such mild inflammation was a common occurrence in young children. the paediatrician that the child was referred to was not able to examine the child due to the child’s distress. the paediatrician indicated to the mother “i don’t see any redness or bleeding. i think she is fine now”.
allegation of sexual abuse of y
... on 30 november 2020 and 1 december 2020, [y] put her finger into her vagina when she was having a shower. she was standing up and putting her finger into her vagina. i never observed this before. i had a concern and i contacted child protection helpline and described my observation. the staff over the phone said to me “it is sexual abuse.” i cried when i heard it. and i said to her “i have to send the children for contact on wednesday.” she said, “stop the contact until further notice, talk to your solicitor.” she provided me with a report number, [...]. i reported it to the police whom advised me to take [y] to see the doctor. i took [x] and [y] to see a doctor. the doctor examined [y] and commented that “the father must have touched [y] [sic] inappropriately during unsupervised contact.” [x] said “papa also touched me here and it is painful sometimes.” the doctor suggested me to seek supervised contact again through the solicitor....
assertion as to advice received from dcj regarding alleged sexual assault on child
the department of communities and justice (dcj) are carrying out an investigation. they have advised [ms kannan] not to allow the children to spend time with you until they have finished their investigation. i will advise you as soon as dcj finishes their investigation. in the meantime you can video call the children each night between 7 and 7.30pm
assertion as to medical advice received regarding alleged sexual assault on child
the doctor examined [y] and commented that “the father must have touched [y] (sic) inappropriately during unsupervised contact”. [x] said “papa also touched me here and it is painful sometimes.” the doctor suggested me to seek supervised contact again through the solicitor.
dear sir/madam i had examined [y] today when she presented for a consultation with her mother. i have serious concerns about her well being when she is with her father. her mother tells me that her father had sexually abused her brother. i strongly recommend that she stays with her mother. yours faithfully, [dr p]
dear sir/madam i have serious concerns for the safety of [x] if he is allowed to visit his father without supervision. his mother gave me a history of sexual/physical abuse by his father. yours faithfully, [dr p]
dear sir/madam i have serious concerns for the safety of [y] if she is allowed to visit her father without supervision. as per his [sic] mother, her brother was sexually and physically abused by his father. i would be grateful if could [sic] ensure that the visits are supervised for the safety of [y]. yours faithfully, [dr p]
explanation as to why did not comply with orders
reason given by the mother for withdrawal of advo application
allegations of financial abuse
matters noted in interim judgement not addressed
allegations made by the mother
around [mid] 2019, [mr kannan] became more violent towards me when we found out i do not have enough points to make a permanent residency application. he choked me and threatened me that “if you are not going to get me pr there is going to be blood, i will throw you off the balcony, you fucking bitch.
around this time, he threatened me to write on a piece of paper that he intended to divorce me.[14]
findings as to credit
family report  if the court determines that the children are not at an unacceptable risk of harm in the father’s care, that they live with the father and spend time with the mother each alternate weekend and from wednesday afternoon until thursday morning in the intervening week, in addition to special days, and (b) if the court determines that there is an ongoing risk of high parental conflict, that the father have sole parental responsibility.   if the court determines that there is an ongoing risk of high parental conflict, that the father have sole parental responsibility.   if the court determined that there is ongoing risk of high parental conflict, it is recommended that [mr kannan] have sole parental responsibility for the children. in other circumstances, it is recommended that the parents attend keeping contact program to assist them in the process of sharing parental responsibility. [10] unless the evidence before the court suggests otherwise, it is recommended that an order be made for the children to live with [mr kannan]. [11] if the court is satisfied that [mr kannan] has demonstrated capacity to comply with orders, it is recommended that the children spend time with [ms kannan] each alternate weekend from friday 5pm until sunday 5pm, and from wednesday afternoon until thursday morning in the intervening week, in addition to special days. [12] if the court remains concerned that [ms kannan] has limited capacity to support the children’s ongoing relationship with [mr kannan] and their paternal family, it is recommended that the children spend no time with [ms kannan].
primary and secondary considerations
at times... [x] presented with strong and negative views about [ms kannan], and the manner in which she interacts with or cares for him. whilst [x] said that his comments were based on his own observations and experiences of [ms kannan], he also mentioned that [mr kannan] and [ms m] have made certain comments to him regarding [ms kannan], which may have influence his views... [x] is aware of the conflict and adult issues in dispute between [ms kannan] and [mr kannan].   if [ms kannan’s] allegations against [mr kannan] are exaggerated or falsified, then it demonstrates a lack of capacity for [ms kannan] to place the current and ongoing needs of the children above her own. in the absence of any change to [ms kannan’s] behaviours, continuing an arrangement whereby the children spend regular time with [ms kannan] may increase their exposure to parental conflict, further safety investigations and increases the likelihood that their time and relationship with [mr kannan] and the paternal family will be severed. if the above-mentioned risk issues in relation to [ms kannan’s] parenting capacity remain, then such risk issues and impact upon the children likely outweigh any benefit for the children of maintaining a relationship with [ms kannan], and it may be in the children’s best interest if they spend no time with [ms kannan]. in this event it is likely that the children will experience some grief and loss associated with this change, given they have an established relationship with [ms kannan], however, they may experience greater stability in [mr kannan’s] case and be protected from detrimental outcomes that are associated with entrenched and long term parental conflict.
international travel
conclusion
associate: dated: 3 march 2023
dated: 3 march 2023