last updated: 14 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
schild & schild [2023] fedcfamc2f 613
orders
the court orders, pending any further order, that:  any amended application or response, (b) an updated financial statement, (c) a single consolidated trial affidavit, and (d) affidavits from any other witnesses upon which they rely.   an updated financial statement, (c) a single consolidated trial affidavit, and (d) affidavits from any other witnesses upon which they rely.   a single consolidated trial affidavit, and (d) affidavits from any other witnesses upon which they rely.   affidavits from any other witnesses upon which they rely.   a minute of the orders sought (b) a list of the documents to be read in their case, (c) a brief chronology, (d) a schedule of objections, (e) a joint balance sheet, and (f) a brief summary of argument.   a list of the documents to be read in their case, (c) a brief chronology, (d) a schedule of objections, (e) a joint balance sheet, and (f) a brief summary of argument.   a brief chronology, (d) a schedule of objections, (e) a joint balance sheet, and (f) a brief summary of argument.   a schedule of objections, (e) a joint balance sheet, and (f) a brief summary of argument.   a joint balance sheet, and (f) a brief summary of argument.   a brief summary of argument.
reasons for judgment
judge street  the objects are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by:- (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. in masson v parsons [2019] hca 21, (2019) 266 clr 554, their honours kiefel cj, bell, gageler, keane, nettle, and gordon jj noted that the focus of the objects was on “ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child” [8]. for overseas travel, i have taken note of authorities such as line & line [1996] famca 145, (1997) flc 92-729 (“line”) which indicates i consider the degree of risk of a parent not returning with the children, including their ties to australia, motives to return or not, and whether the proposed country is a hague convention country.   ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.
33. section 60ca of the act provides that:-
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
34. pursuant to s 60cc(1) of the act:-
...in determining what is in the child’s best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3). those primary considerations contained in s 60cc(2) of the act and additional considerations contained in s 60cc(3) of the act are set out hereafter. section 60cc is contained within pt vii of the act. the objects of pt vii of the act are set out in s 60b(1) of the act, and are to ensure that the best interests of children are met by:- (a) ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children. the principles underlying the objects of pt vii of the act are set out in s 60b(2) of the act, and, unless it would not be in a child’s best interests, are: (a) children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children,   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children,   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children,   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children,   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture). section 61da of the act requires the court to apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. if the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility does apply, or the court is otherwise satisfied on the evidence that it is in a child’s best interests to make an order for equal shared parental responsibility, then the court must consider whether it is in a child’s best interests and reasonably practical to spend equal time with each parent or, if not equal time, whether it is in a child’s best interests and reasonably practical for a child to spend substantial and significant time with each parent. the presumption set out in s 61da of the act does not apply where there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has abused a child the subject of the proceedings or another child of that parent’s singular household at the time or engaged in family violence, (s 61da(2)). further, the presumption may be rebutted if the court is satisfied it would not be in the child’s best interests for the parents to have equal shared parental responsibility (s 61da(4)). “family violence” is defined in section 4ab of the act and is as follows: (1) for the purposes of this act, family violence means violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a member of the person's family (the family member), or causes the family member to be fearful.   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
41. pursuant to ss 60cc(2) and 60cc(2a) of the act:-   the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. note: making these considerations the primary ones is consistent with the objects of this part set out in paragraphs 60b(1)(a) and (b). (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). the court must also consider the additional considerations under s 60cc(3) of the act, as far as they are relevant to this proceeding. in mulvany & lane [2009] famcafc 76, (2009) flc 93-404 it was observed by finn, may and thackray jj that: it is important to recognise that the miscellany of "considerations" contained in ss 60cc(2) and (3) is no more than a means to an end. self-evidently, they are only matters to be considered. of course, we accept they are of great importance, being the factors identified by parliament as those the court must take into account (when they are relevant). however, they must be applied in a manner consistent with the overarching imperative of securing the outcome most likely to promote the child's best interests. it needs also to be remembered that the importance of each s 60cc factor will vary from case to case... (emphasis in original) whilst the additional considerations as set out in s 60cc(3) must be considered by the court, specific reference to each and every of those considerations is unnecessary in these reasons.   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
associate: dated: 24 may 2023
dated: 24 may 2023