last updated: 23 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
martoulis & valas (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 365
orders
the court orders that:
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
background
117 costs (1) subject to subsection (2), subsections 45a(6) and 70nfb(1) and sections 117aa and 117ac, each party to proceedings under this act shall bear his or her own costs. (2) if, in proceedings under this act, the court is of opinion that there are circumstances that justify it in doing so, the court may, subject to subsections (2a), (4), (4a), (5) and (6) and the applicable rules of court, make such order as to costs and security for costs, whether by way of interlocutory order or otherwise, as the court considers just. (2a) in considering what order (if any) should be made under subsection (2), the court shall have regard to: (a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant. (notations omitted)   the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings, (b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that assistance to that party, (c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the conduct of the parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions to answer questions, admissions of facts, production of documents and similar matters, (d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the court, (e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the proceedings, (f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings and the terms of any such offer, and (g) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   such other matters as the court considers relevant.  ] the wife says the husband’s claim that he brought into the ‘reconciled’ relationship in mid-2007 $60,000 from the property settlement he had received in 2006 was simply not correct and the reality was far from what was asserted ... the point the husband tried to make by the $60,000 assertion was an important one.
...  ] i am satisfied from those contemporary materials and those objectively established facts as well as the husband’s demeanour and evidence when cross-examined on this point, that the husband did not “contribute $60,000 of his $70,000 ‘payout’” or any other significant amount “back into the family finances”. that the husband made such an assertion goes to the reliability of his evidence and his case.
it was argued that the husband pursued the case in spite of that objective evidence.  ] the reference to “financial resources” in the context of s 75(2)(b) has long been correctly interpreted by the family court to refer to “a source of financial support which a party can reasonably expect will be available to him or her to supply a financial need or deficiency”. the requirement that the financial resource be that “of” a party no doubt implies that the source of financial support be one on which the party is capable of drawing. it must involve something more than an expectation of benevolence on the part of another. but it goes too far to suggest that the party must control the source of financial support. thus, it has long correctly been recognised that a nominated beneficiary of a discretionary trust, who has no control over the trustee but who has a reasonable expectation that the trustee’s discretion will be exercised in his or her favour, has a financial resource to the extent of that expectation.  7] although of only the husband and the wife, photo 18 shows the parties looking at each other while the wife has her arm touching the husband’s waist and he has his arm around and resting on her shoulder. photo 19 is of only the husband and the wife and they are pressed together with the husband’s arm around and resting on the wife’s shoulder.
... 9] the wife’s evidence is that the husband moved into her home as a boarder (and alternate weekends ceased) in 2012. hence, this cannot be a “changeover.” i do not accept the wife’s evidence on this point. [170] at this moment in time the photo does show two parents with an apparent closeness and affection for each other and the parties do “look happy and affectionate” ... [171] at that moment in time the family were at an event together and the parents do look, to any observer, happy and affectionate or look to have a closeness and affection for each other. what lies behind that “look” or apparent closeness and affection is another matter. it is possible that, if asked for a photo by her daughter, the wife would attempt to look happy and even affectionate just for the photo. the wife is an intelligent person and i am satisfied she understood the difference between the objective “look” or appearance of the photo and whether or not she was happy and affectionate at that moment. the wife’s flat and repeated denial of the obvious appearance of the photo goes to the reliability of her evidence.  0] at this moment in time the photo does show two parents with an apparent closeness and affection for each other and the parties do “look happy and affectionate” ... [171] at that moment in time the family were at an event together and the parents do look, to any observer, happy and affectionate or look to have a closeness and affection for each other. what lies behind that “look” or apparent closeness and affection is another matter. it is possible that, if asked for a photo by her daughter, the wife would attempt to look happy and even affectionate just for the photo. the wife is an intelligent person and i am satisfied she understood the difference between the objective “look” or appearance of the photo and whether or not she was happy and affectionate at that moment. the wife’s flat and repeated denial of the obvious appearance of the photo goes to the reliability of her evidence.  1] at that moment in time the family were at an event together and the parents do look, to any observer, happy and affectionate or look to have a closeness and affection for each other. what lies behind that “look” or apparent closeness and affection is another matter. it is possible that, if asked for a photo by her daughter, the wife would attempt to look happy and even affectionate just for the photo. the wife is an intelligent person and i am satisfied she understood the difference between the objective “look” or appearance of the photo and whether or not she was happy and affectionate at that moment. the wife’s flat and repeated denial of the obvious appearance of the photo goes to the reliability of her evidence.  6] the error to assert that her father had died in 2012 as part of the deflection of the significance of the photo reduces my confidence in the reliability of the wife’s evidence. the “christmas” or “new year’ events of the -4 photo and photo 20 are inconsistent with the wife’s evidence of [82].  9] i do not accept that the events and photos described above are merely special occasions that the husband was invited to as the father of the children, or as an active father invited to events. the wife’s case was otherwise that he was not an “active father”. 20 of these 21 events are consistent with the husband’s case and inconsistent with the wife’s case and evidence. this is particularly when taken and looked at together over 10 years.
de facto relationships meaning of de facto relationship (1) a person is in a de facto relationship with another person if:   the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.
paragraph (c) has effect subject to subsection (5). working out if persons have a relationship as a couple (2) those circumstances may include any or all of the following:   the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them,   whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship,   no particular finding in relation to any circumstance is to be regarded as necessary in deciding whether the persons have a de facto relationship. (4) a court determining whether a de facto relationship exists is entitled to have regard to such matters, and to attach such weight to any matter, as may seem appropriate to the court in the circumstances of the case. (5) for the purposes of this act: (a) a de facto relationship can exist between 2 persons of different sexes and between 2 persons of the same sex, and (b) a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally married to someone else or in another de facto relationship. when 2 persons are related by family (6) for the purposes of subsection (1), 2 persons are related by family if:   a de facto relationship can exist between 2 persons of different sexes and between 2 persons of the same sex, and (b) a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally married to someone else or in another de facto relationship.   a de facto relationship can exist even if one of the persons is legally married to someone else or in another de facto relationship.   one is the child (including an adopted child) of the other, or (b) one is another descendant of the other (even if the relationship between them is traced through an adoptive parent), or (c) they have a parent in common (who may be an adoptive parent of either or both of them).   one is another descendant of the other (even if the relationship between them is traced through an adoptive parent), or (c) they have a parent in common (who may be an adoptive parent of either or both of them).   they have a parent in common (who may be an adoptive parent of either or both of them).
for this purpose, disregard whether an adoption is declared void or has ceased to have effect.  4] the wife’s flat denial of the obvious appearance of closeness and affection between the husband and wife reduces my confidence in the reliability of her evidence. i do not accept the wife’s evidence or explanation that these photos and this event showing apparent closeness and affection was merely because child [ms f] asked for a photo at her celebration and “her father is her father”. that denial of the obvious appearance of the photo and there being no explanation for the photo that i accept, reduces my confidence in the reliability of the wife’s evidence about the nature of the parties relationship. this event and the closeness between the parties in inconsistent and discordant with the wife’s case and evidence and in consistent with the husband’s case.  6] it was not contested that photos 1 and 2 of -21 are photos of a dinner in 2019 of a charity where the wife has a position of organisation. photo 1 shows the wife with fellow organisers. photo 2 shows the wife with other guests and it is not disputed that the husband is seated next to her, although he is obscured and only partially pictured in the photo. there was no cross-examination about the event, or the husband’s description of it or the photo. the husband alleges he was introduced by the wife as her husband to others at that event.
associate: dated: 31 march 2023
dated: 31 march 2023