last updated: 1 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
cabrera & enfield [2023] fedcfamc2f 248
orders
the court orders that:  during school terms, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school on friday or 3:30p.m. if not a school day until the beginning of school on tuesday or 9:00a.m. if is not a school day. (b) all school term holidays commencing 2023 as follows: (i) in relation to term 1 school holidays, as agreed between the parties in writing from time to time and/or in default of agreement as follows: in the year 2023, for five (5) consecutive days commencing from the conclusion of school until 6:00p.m. on the sixth (6th) day, in the year 2024, for six (6) consecutive nights from the last day of school until the seventh (7th) day at 6:00p.m, and in the year 2025 and onwards, the term 1 school holidays are to be shared equally between the parties with the child to spend the first week of the school term holidays with the father in odd numbered years and with the mother in even numbered years and it being noted that the school term shall commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first day of term 2 with changeover taking place on the second saturday at 6:00p.m. (ii) in relation to term 2 school holidays, as agreed between the parties in writing from time to time and/or in default of agreement as follows: in the year 2023, x spend the whole school term holidays with the father, in the year 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, x spend one week with the mother and two weeks with the father, with the father exercising contact from the first two weeks being from the beginning of school to the third saturday at 6:00p.m. and x shall be with the mother from the third saturday at 6:00p.m. to monday in the week of the commencement of school at 9:00a.m. and if it is a non-school day then her contact is to conclude at 9:00a.m., and in the year 2025 and each alternate year thereafter, x shall spend two weeks with the father and one week with the mother with the mother’s week commencing from the conclusion of school until the second saturday at 6:00p.m. and x shall be with the father from the second saturday at 6:00p.m. to the commencement of school term 3. (iii) in relation to term 3 school holidays, as agreed between the parties in writing from time to time and/or in default of agreement as follows: in the year 2023, for five (5) consecutive days commencing from the conclusion of school until 6:00p.m. on the sixth (6th) day, in the year 2024, for six (6) consecutive nights from the last day of school until the seventh (7th) day at 6:00p.m., and in the year 2025, the term 3 school holidays are to be shared equally between the parties with x to spend the first week of the school term holidays with the father in odd numbered years and with the mother in even numbered years and it being noted that the school term shall commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first day of term 4 with changeover taking place on the second saturday at 6:00p.m. (iv) during the long summer holidays which are deemed to commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first school day in january each year to be exercised between the parties as follows: in the year 2023 and each alternate year thereafter as follows: (i) with the mother for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the father from the second week for twenty-one (21) consecutive nights, (iii) with the mother for seven (7) consecutive nights, and (iv) with the father for the next seven (7) consecutive nights and to continue on a weekly basis until the commencement of school. in the year 2024 and each alternate year thereafter: (i) with the father for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the mother from the second week for fourteen (14) consecutive nights, (iii) with the father for fourteen (14) consecutive nights for the third (3rd) and fourth (4th) week, and (iv) with the mother and father for the balance the long summer vacation on the basis of x spending seven (7) consecutive nights with each parent.   all school term holidays commencing 2023 as follows: (i) in relation to term 1 school holidays, as agreed between the parties in writing from time to time and/or in default of agreement as follows: in the year 2023, for five (5) consecutive days commencing from the conclusion of school until 6:00p.m. on the sixth (6th) day, in the year 2024, for six (6) consecutive nights from the last day of school until the seventh (7th) day at 6:00p.m, and in the year 2025 and onwards, the term 1 school holidays are to be shared equally between the parties with the child to spend the first week of the school term holidays with the father in odd numbered years and with the mother in even numbered years and it being noted that the school term shall commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first day of term 2 with changeover taking place on the second saturday at 6:00p.m. (ii) in relation to term 2 school holidays, as agreed between the parties in writing from time to time and/or in default of agreement as follows: in the year 2023, x spend the whole school term holidays with the father, in the year 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, x spend one week with the mother and two weeks with the father, with the father exercising contact from the first two weeks being from the beginning of school to the third saturday at 6:00p.m. and x shall be with the mother from the third saturday at 6:00p.m. to monday in the week of the commencement of school at 9:00a.m. and if it is a non-school day then her contact is to conclude at 9:00a.m., and in the year 2025 and each alternate year thereafter, x shall spend two weeks with the father and one week with the mother with the mother’s week commencing from the conclusion of school until the second saturday at 6:00p.m. and x shall be with the father from the second saturday at 6:00p.m. to the commencement of school term 3. (iii) in relation to term 3 school holidays, as agreed between the parties in writing from time to time and/or in default of agreement as follows: in the year 2023, for five (5) consecutive days commencing from the conclusion of school until 6:00p.m. on the sixth (6th) day, in the year 2024, for six (6) consecutive nights from the last day of school until the seventh (7th) day at 6:00p.m., and in the year 2025, the term 3 school holidays are to be shared equally between the parties with x to spend the first week of the school term holidays with the father in odd numbered years and with the mother in even numbered years and it being noted that the school term shall commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first day of term 4 with changeover taking place on the second saturday at 6:00p.m. (iv) during the long summer holidays which are deemed to commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first school day in january each year to be exercised between the parties as follows: in the year 2023 and each alternate year thereafter as follows: (i) with the mother for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the father from the second week for twenty-one (21) consecutive nights, (iii) with the mother for seven (7) consecutive nights, and (iv) with the father for the next seven (7) consecutive nights and to continue on a weekly basis until the commencement of school. in the year 2024 and each alternate year thereafter: (i) with the father for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the mother from the second week for fourteen (14) consecutive nights, (iii) with the father for fourteen (14) consecutive nights for the third (3rd) and fourth (4th) week, and (iv) with the mother and father for the balance the long summer vacation on the basis of x spending seven (7) consecutive nights with each parent.   in relation to term 1 school holidays, as agreed between the parties in writing from time to time and/or in default of agreement as follows: in the year 2023, for five (5) consecutive days commencing from the conclusion of school until 6:00p.m. on the sixth (6th) day, in the year 2024, for six (6) consecutive nights from the last day of school until the seventh (7th) day at 6:00p.m, and in the year 2025 and onwards, the term 1 school holidays are to be shared equally between the parties with the child to spend the first week of the school term holidays with the father in odd numbered years and with the mother in even numbered years and it being noted that the school term shall commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first day of term 2 with changeover taking place on the second saturday at 6:00p.m. (ii) in relation to term 2 school holidays, as agreed between the parties in writing from time to time and/or in default of agreement as follows: in the year 2023, x spend the whole school term holidays with the father, in the year 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, x spend one week with the mother and two weeks with the father, with the father exercising contact from the first two weeks being from the beginning of school to the third saturday at 6:00p.m. and x shall be with the mother from the third saturday at 6:00p.m. to monday in the week of the commencement of school at 9:00a.m. and if it is a non-school day then her contact is to conclude at 9:00a.m., and in the year 2025 and each alternate year thereafter, x shall spend two weeks with the father and one week with the mother with the mother’s week commencing from the conclusion of school until the second saturday at 6:00p.m. and x shall be with the father from the second saturday at 6:00p.m. to the commencement of school term 3. (iii) in relation to term 3 school holidays, as agreed between the parties in writing from time to time and/or in default of agreement as follows: in the year 2023, for five (5) consecutive days commencing from the conclusion of school until 6:00p.m. on the sixth (6th) day, in the year 2024, for six (6) consecutive nights from the last day of school until the seventh (7th) day at 6:00p.m., and in the year 2025, the term 3 school holidays are to be shared equally between the parties with x to spend the first week of the school term holidays with the father in odd numbered years and with the mother in even numbered years and it being noted that the school term shall commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first day of term 4 with changeover taking place on the second saturday at 6:00p.m. (iv) during the long summer holidays which are deemed to commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first school day in january each year to be exercised between the parties as follows: in the year 2023 and each alternate year thereafter as follows: (i) with the mother for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the father from the second week for twenty-one (21) consecutive nights, (iii) with the mother for seven (7) consecutive nights, and (iv) with the father for the next seven (7) consecutive nights and to continue on a weekly basis until the commencement of school. in the year 2024 and each alternate year thereafter: (i) with the father for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the mother from the second week for fourteen (14) consecutive nights, (iii) with the father for fourteen (14) consecutive nights for the third (3rd) and fourth (4th) week, and (iv) with the mother and father for the balance the long summer vacation on the basis of x spending seven (7) consecutive nights with each parent.  ) in relation to term 2 school holidays, as agreed between the parties in writing from time to time and/or in default of agreement as follows: in the year 2023, x spend the whole school term holidays with the father, in the year 2024 and each alternate year thereafter, x spend one week with the mother and two weeks with the father, with the father exercising contact from the first two weeks being from the beginning of school to the third saturday at 6:00p.m. and x shall be with the mother from the third saturday at 6:00p.m. to monday in the week of the commencement of school at 9:00a.m. and if it is a non-school day then her contact is to conclude at 9:00a.m., and in the year 2025 and each alternate year thereafter, x shall spend two weeks with the father and one week with the mother with the mother’s week commencing from the conclusion of school until the second saturday at 6:00p.m. and x shall be with the father from the second saturday at 6:00p.m. to the commencement of school term 3. (iii) in relation to term 3 school holidays, as agreed between the parties in writing from time to time and/or in default of agreement as follows: in the year 2023, for five (5) consecutive days commencing from the conclusion of school until 6:00p.m. on the sixth (6th) day, in the year 2024, for six (6) consecutive nights from the last day of school until the seventh (7th) day at 6:00p.m., and in the year 2025, the term 3 school holidays are to be shared equally between the parties with x to spend the first week of the school term holidays with the father in odd numbered years and with the mother in even numbered years and it being noted that the school term shall commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first day of term 4 with changeover taking place on the second saturday at 6:00p.m. (iv) during the long summer holidays which are deemed to commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first school day in january each year to be exercised between the parties as follows: in the year 2023 and each alternate year thereafter as follows: (i) with the mother for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the father from the second week for twenty-one (21) consecutive nights, (iii) with the mother for seven (7) consecutive nights, and (iv) with the father for the next seven (7) consecutive nights and to continue on a weekly basis until the commencement of school. in the year 2024 and each alternate year thereafter: (i) with the father for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the mother from the second week for fourteen (14) consecutive nights, (iii) with the father for fourteen (14) consecutive nights for the third (3rd) and fourth (4th) week, and (iv) with the mother and father for the balance the long summer vacation on the basis of x spending seven (7) consecutive nights with each parent.  i) in relation to term 3 school holidays, as agreed between the parties in writing from time to time and/or in default of agreement as follows: in the year 2023, for five (5) consecutive days commencing from the conclusion of school until 6:00p.m. on the sixth (6th) day, in the year 2024, for six (6) consecutive nights from the last day of school until the seventh (7th) day at 6:00p.m., and in the year 2025, the term 3 school holidays are to be shared equally between the parties with x to spend the first week of the school term holidays with the father in odd numbered years and with the mother in even numbered years and it being noted that the school term shall commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first day of term 4 with changeover taking place on the second saturday at 6:00p.m. (iv) during the long summer holidays which are deemed to commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first school day in january each year to be exercised between the parties as follows: in the year 2023 and each alternate year thereafter as follows: (i) with the mother for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the father from the second week for twenty-one (21) consecutive nights, (iii) with the mother for seven (7) consecutive nights, and (iv) with the father for the next seven (7) consecutive nights and to continue on a weekly basis until the commencement of school. in the year 2024 and each alternate year thereafter: (i) with the father for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the mother from the second week for fourteen (14) consecutive nights, (iii) with the father for fourteen (14) consecutive nights for the third (3rd) and fourth (4th) week, and (iv) with the mother and father for the balance the long summer vacation on the basis of x spending seven (7) consecutive nights with each parent.  ) during the long summer holidays which are deemed to commence on the last day of school and conclude on the first school day in january each year to be exercised between the parties as follows: in the year 2023 and each alternate year thereafter as follows: (i) with the mother for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the father from the second week for twenty-one (21) consecutive nights, (iii) with the mother for seven (7) consecutive nights, and (iv) with the father for the next seven (7) consecutive nights and to continue on a weekly basis until the commencement of school. in the year 2024 and each alternate year thereafter: (i) with the father for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the mother from the second week for fourteen (14) consecutive nights, (iii) with the father for fourteen (14) consecutive nights for the third (3rd) and fourth (4th) week, and (iv) with the mother and father for the balance the long summer vacation on the basis of x spending seven (7) consecutive nights with each parent.   with the mother for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the father from the second week for twenty-one (21) consecutive nights, (iii) with the mother for seven (7) consecutive nights, and (iv) with the father for the next seven (7) consecutive nights and to continue on a weekly basis until the commencement of school.  ) with the father from the second week for twenty-one (21) consecutive nights, (iii) with the mother for seven (7) consecutive nights, and (iv) with the father for the next seven (7) consecutive nights and to continue on a weekly basis until the commencement of school.  i) with the mother for seven (7) consecutive nights, and (iv) with the father for the next seven (7) consecutive nights and to continue on a weekly basis until the commencement of school.  ) with the father for the next seven (7) consecutive nights and to continue on a weekly basis until the commencement of school.   with the father for the first week for seven (7) consecutive nights, (ii) with the mother from the second week for fourteen (14) consecutive nights, (iii) with the father for fourteen (14) consecutive nights for the third (3rd) and fourth (4th) week, and (iv) with the mother and father for the balance the long summer vacation on the basis of x spending seven (7) consecutive nights with each parent.  ) with the mother from the second week for fourteen (14) consecutive nights, (iii) with the father for fourteen (14) consecutive nights for the third (3rd) and fourth (4th) week, and (iv) with the mother and father for the balance the long summer vacation on the basis of x spending seven (7) consecutive nights with each parent.  i) with the father for fourteen (14) consecutive nights for the third (3rd) and fourth (4th) week, and (iv) with the mother and father for the balance the long summer vacation on the basis of x spending seven (7) consecutive nights with each parent.  ) with the mother and father for the balance the long summer vacation on the basis of x spending seven (7) consecutive nights with each parent.   if halloween 31 october falls during a school night, then the parent with whom x is to spend time is to collect x from school and deliver him to school the following morning and if it is not a school day then until 10:00a.m., and (b) if the day falls on a weekend, then x shall spend time with the parent who shall be exercising the time pursuant to these orders from 3:00p.m. on 31 october until the following day at 10:00a.m.   if the day falls on a weekend, then x shall spend time with the parent who shall be exercising the time pursuant to these orders from 3:00p.m. on 31 october until the following day at 10:00a.m.
communications
other  discussing these proceedings with or in the presence and/or hearing of x, and (b) denigrating, abusing, belittling, or rebutting the other parent or the other parent’s family members and/or friends with or in the presence and/or hearing of x.   denigrating, abusing, belittling, or rebutting the other parent or the other parent’s family members and/or friends with or in the presence and/or hearing of x.
interstate and overseas travel  the places and/or countries and the intended itinerary as far as practicable to which x will travel, (b) the intended airline and booking flights upon which x will travel, (c) the date upon which x will depart from and return to the commonwealth of australia, (d) the addresses and accommodation bookings at which x shall reside, (e) telephone number upon which the other party can communicate with x during the travel period once per week, and (f) confirmation that x is covered for comprehensive medical travel insurance.   the intended airline and booking flights upon which x will travel, (c) the date upon which x will depart from and return to the commonwealth of australia, (d) the addresses and accommodation bookings at which x shall reside, (e) telephone number upon which the other party can communicate with x during the travel period once per week, and (f) confirmation that x is covered for comprehensive medical travel insurance.   the date upon which x will depart from and return to the commonwealth of australia, (d) the addresses and accommodation bookings at which x shall reside, (e) telephone number upon which the other party can communicate with x during the travel period once per week, and (f) confirmation that x is covered for comprehensive medical travel insurance.   the addresses and accommodation bookings at which x shall reside, (e) telephone number upon which the other party can communicate with x during the travel period once per week, and (f) confirmation that x is covered for comprehensive medical travel insurance.   telephone number upon which the other party can communicate with x during the travel period once per week, and (f) confirmation that x is covered for comprehensive medical travel insurance.   confirmation that x is covered for comprehensive medical travel insurance.   the party who has received the request for the other parent to travel with x outside the time in circumstances when this paragraph shall apply, shall advise the proposed travelling parent of any reasonable objection within 14 days of receipt of the written notice pursuant to the preceding paragraph to the party intending to travel and such objection will not be unreasonably made, and (b) in the event that no objection is received, the party who has received the travel request is deemed to have consented to the travel.   in the event that no objection is received, the party who has received the travel request is deemed to have consented to the travel.
reasons for judgment
judge glass:
statutory framework
primary considerations
the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with both of his parents
... [ms cabrera]’s psi profile showed that the overall level of stress in the parent-child system was relatively low (17th percentile) as were her scores on the child domain (34th percentile) and parent domain (6th percentile). indeed, the score for demandingness (<1st percentile) is particularly low which suggests a 3-year-old child who is independent and never unreasonably attempts to gain parent attention. it is improbable for a 3-year-old child to be presenting in such a manner and suggests problems in attachment and possible neglect or, alternatively, is representative of socially desirable responding. [ms cabrera]’s score on the parenting competence (<1st percentile) subscale is similarly surprising as it suggests a mother whose parenting prowess is exemplary in every aspect, or again, socially desirable responding. notably, [ms cabrera] identified experiencing stressors outside the parent-child relationship that are exceptionally high (98th percentile). this score typically represents a parent whose attention is diverted from their child-rearing responsibilities and their energy drained adding to the parent’s burden and increasing the likelihood of dysfunctional parenting. this score is again inconsistent with the profile provided by [ms cabrera] and suggests an effortful distortion of her self-representation as a parent.[10]
... this is summary information around, there is not a particular one thing that says ok well that’s what points to that, it’s all of the information together in terms of all the historical detail, all of the affidavit material that’s put together, all of the responses that i’ve got from the parents, that points to those sorts of traits.. ... they’re the traits that are existing... there is examples of those types of behaviours that have been presented to me in all of the affidavit material and the information that’s been given to me.
... the convergent evidence points to [ms cabrera] having struggles with perceived criticism from others, paranoid ideation about the intentions of others, a focus on retribution, and struggles to manage her anger. [ms cabrera] has limited capacity to focus on the needs of her son in a sustained and emotionally nurturing way. [ms cabrera]’s focus on her own tumultuous internal states and her own desires and needs leaves her unable to perceive the impacts of her behaviour on others, and particularly on her son.[13] (emphasis added)   cabrera] was observed to give [x] a number of new toys and to demonstrate some level of frustration if [x] did not show positive emotions towards her efforts. although [x] was observed to be an extremely independent child and often objected to [ms cabrera]’s offers of assistance (“i can do it”). limited proximity-seeking was observed between [ms cabrera] and [x] and the interaction was more like a child carer one rather than a mother-child interaction.[14]
i reject the submission. the absence of more granular detail does not deprive the court of the facts underlying the observations. other parts of dr d’s report record more detailed and specific observations of matters upon which dr d placed particular weight.
the need to protect x from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
additional considerations
any views expressed by x and any factors (such as his maturity or level of understanding) that are relevant to the weight to be given to his views
the nature of x’s relationships with each of x’s parents and other people, including any grandparent or other relative  cabrera] was observed to give [x] a number of new toys and to demonstrate some level of frustration if [x] did not show positive emotions towards her efforts... limited proximity-seeking was observed between [ms cabrera] and [x] and the interaction was more like a child carer one rather than a mother-child interaction. [ms cabrera] was observed to be positive towards [x] when he was positive towards her efforts, but she disengaged and was somewhat despondent when [x] was non-compliant or disinterested (at one point turning the camera to attempt to conceal that she was having a cup of coffee). [ms cabrera]’s facial and vocal expressiveness was limited to when she was giving [x] praise. [ms cabrera] was highly focussed on making the play interaction an opportunity for learning, but she often missed cues for child-initiated play and connection with [x].[21] (emphasis added) [ms cabrera] was heard bribing [x] that they needed to read books for me “and then i’ll buy you another toy”. [x] initially refused to engage in reading and [ms cabrera] picked up her phone and checked her messages. she persists with another request with a promise: “we have one more thing to do and then we are going to see your friends”. [x] tantrumed and [ms cabrera] tells [x] that “it is ok. we don’t have to read”. this pattern was repeated and ultimately [ms cabrera] started to read a nursery rhyme book on the other side of the table from [x]. [x] engaged briefly to turn the pages and then disengaged.[22] (emphasis added)
the extent to which each of x’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to x, to spend time with him, and to communicate with him
the extent to which each of x’s parents has fulfilled or failed to fulfil their obligations to maintain x
the likely effect of any changes in x’s circumstances, including the likely effect on x of any separation from either of his parents, or any other child or other person, including grandparent or other relative, with whom he has been living
i don’t believe that that’s necessarily the case, because if this child were cared about, cared for on a week about basis the level of instability, actually for this child, in terms of my concerns about [ms cabrera], with her emotional instability, and her hostility towards [mr enfield], would create a situation where the child is not developing that sort of level of social, emotional resilience to cope with any change.
there are numerous factors that would increase the risk of relapse, but in [mr enfield]’s case he doesn’t blame other people for his, for what’s happening for him. he doesn’t have an external locus of control. [ms cabrera] has, but [mr enfield] hasn’t.
no, i would disagree. that’s consistent with someone, and i’ve described this in my report, who struggles to, at times, he has a poor coping ability and he has struggled with that across time. and so the stressors that he’s referring to there happen to be [ms cabrera], it could be other stressors. but that’s not blaming her for that.
the practical difficulty and expense of x spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect his right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of each of x’s parents and any other person, including any grandparent or other relative of x, to provide for his needs, including emotional and intellectual needs  cabrera]’s capacity for emotion regulation, effective and honest communication, and genuine connections in relationships is poor... the convergent evidence points to her having struggles with perceived criticism from others, paranoid ideation about the intentions of others, a focus on retribution, and struggles to manage her anger. [ms cabrera] has limited capacity to focus on the needs of her son in a sustained and emotionally nurturing way. [ms cabrera]’s focus on her own tumultuous internal states and her own desires and needs leaves her unable to perceive the impacts of her behaviour on others, and particularly on her son. the convergent evidence suggests that [ms cabrera] has some personality pathology (i.e., narcissistic and borderline traits) that may meet criteria for diagnosis.[27] (emphasis added) ...the information in this assessment suggests that [ms cabrera] has engaged in a level of emotional dysregulation (e.g., threats, yelling, impulsivity, behaviour directed towards retribution) and physical abuse (e.g., scratching, animal cruelty) that is suggestive of significant personality pathology.... her lack of empathy, histrionic and impulsive behaviour in response to perceived slights, manipulative and transactional approach to interpersonal relationships and jealous and paranoid ideation about [mr enfield] as well as her grandiose sense of self and sense of entitlement is most parsimoniously understood as narcissistic personality disorder. children of narcissistic parents struggle to have their emotional needs met and are typically enrolled in a cycle of emotional manipulation whereby the child is reinforced for behaviour consistent with adoration of the parent and punished or neglected if the parent’s needs (emotional and instrumental) are unmet. additionally, children in these circumstances are faced with erratic and unstable behavioural outbursts of the parent to which the child is unable to predict nor prepare, contributing to significant anxiety.[28]
... my concerns were about emotional dysregulation and [ms cabrera’s] difficulties subverting her needs for those of her son, so when, in a highly emotive state about something that she felt slighted about, that she wasn’t able to re-direct her attention to what was required for her son.
i was so anxious at the thought of being [at the family report assessments] that i had chest pains and heart palpitations.[34] i could not attend upon [dr d] because the thought made me experience a physical reaction.[35]
i am experiencing significant distress stemming from a variety of causes, not the least of which relates to the alleged mistreatment, misconduct by [dr d] (an appointed clinical psychologist). [dr d]'s prejudicial assessment and unsafe practices towards me has caused me significant anxiety, stress, and a compromised declined health status. (emphasis added) ... as a result from the significant stress i am currently experiencing caused by [dr d’s] assigned assessment towards me. [sic] i had to undergo unpaid stress leave. not only did i receive an eviction notice but my physical emotional health and wellbeing is now compromised due to the practitioner’s bias assessment and unsafe practices. it is highly concerning [dr d] is not practicing her profession safely. ultimately putting me in a position where i no longer feel safe, comfortable around her and placing my health status significantly at risk. the stress she caused me is impacting my ability to function, work the way i did prior to the stress caused by the practitioner. (emphasis added) post discharge from hospital and with follow up on the treatment of care for my new diagnosis caused by the stress the practitioner has imposed. my family gp [dr g] had written to my clinical psychologist [ms h] a referral letter to focus on stress management treatment. i was also referred to a heart specialist for the management of chest pains, palpitations that is stress related. i am now taking medications in relation to my heart problems since discharge from hospital.[36] (emphasis added)
your [sic] a fucking idiot, are you staring [sic] to understand how the system works, poor [country j] women vs wealthy jewish family. go fuck yourself![38]
mr enfield gave oral evidence that he was very upset when he sent the message, he regretted sending it, and described it as both silly and a heated comment sent in the moment.
parenting capacity relates to the whole picture that the person’s capacity to actually meet the child’s educational, emotional, physical needs. alright. all parents get angry at times, and the information that’s available to me is that that was a once off, within the context of being very angry about a change in circumstance, and that [mr enfield] expressed to me regret that he had sent that and committed to doing better. in fact, he recognised that that was actually not an appropriate message to send.
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of x and of either of his parents, and any other relevant characteristics of x
if x is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child, his right to enjoy his aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order will have on that right
the attitude to x, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of his parents
any family violence involving x or a member of his family
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to x or a member of his family, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, and any other relevant matter
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to x
any other relevant fact or circumstance
parental responsibility
conclusions
the time that [x] spends with each parent during school holiday periods will need to be considered carefully. there has been insufficient evidence provided to me in this assessment that more time with [ms cabrera] over the school holiday periods would be considered appropriate.[53]
she also failed to make any submissions with respect to the issue. mr enfield proposes a gradual increase in the time x spends with his mother during school holiday periods. dr d opined orally that his proposal was reasonable. i find mr enfield’s proposal to be in x’s best interests, including specific provision for international travel for his paternal grandmother’s 70th birthday in 2023.
associate: dated: 15 march 2023
dated: 15 march 2023
[1] family law act 1975 (cth), s 60b.[2] family law act 1975 (cth), s 60ca. [3] family law act 1975 (cth), s 61da. [4] family law act 1975 (cth), s 65daa.[5] ms cabrera’s outline of case filed 28 february 2023, page 3. [6] mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92; (2009) flc 93-405 at [115, 121] adopting mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520; (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [26]. [7] champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96; (2009) flc 93-407 at [191].[8] vigano & desmond [2012] famcafc 79; (2012) flc 93-509 at [79, 87] and the cases there cited.[9] [2001] nswca 305; (2001) 52 nswlr 705. [10] affidavit of dr d filed 24 february 2023, annexure 3 (“first family report”), paragraph 41. [11] first family report, paragraph 88. [12] first family report, paragraph 91. [13] first family report, paragraph 88. [14] first family report, paragraph 72. [15] gosai & gosai (2020) flc 93-975 per watts j at [102]. [16] affidavit of ms cabrera filed 24 february 2023, paragraph 103. [17] kramer & another & ward [2017] famcafc 270; (2017) flc 93-817 at [10]. [18] affidavit of dr d filed 24 february 2023, annexure 4 (“second family report”), paragraph 75.[19] first family report, paragraph 103. [20] first family report, paragraph 103. [21] first family report, paragraph 72. [22] first family report, paragraph 73. [23] second family report, paragraph 71. [24] second family report, paragraph 54.[25] first family report, paragraph 87. [26] affidavit of mr enfield filed 27 february 2023, paragraph 20. [27] first family report, paragraph 88. [28] first family report, paragraph 91. [29] affidavit of ms cabrera filed 24 february 2023, annexure 10. [30] affidavit of ms cabrera filed 24 february 2023, paragraph 256. [31] affidavit of ms cabrera filed 24 february 2023, paragraph 258.[32] affidavit of ms cabrera filed 24 february 2023, annexure 9, page 66.[33] affidavit of ms cabrera filed 24 february 2023, annexure 9, page 68.[34] affidavit of ms cabrera filed 24 february 2023, paragraph 269. [35] affidavit of ms cabrera filed 24 february 2023, paragraph 270.[36] exhibit r3. [37] second family report, paragraph 64. [38] affidavit of ms cabrera filed 24 february 2023, paragraph 165. [39] second family report, paragraph 60. [40] second family report, paragraph 71. [41] second family report, paragraph 60. [42] second family report, paragraph 50. [43] second family report, paragraph 50. [44] family law act 1975 (cth), s 4ab.[45] family law act 1975 (cth), s 4ab. [46] exhibit r5.[47] evidence act 1995 (cth), s 144; mcgregor & mcgregor [2012] famcafc 69; (2012) flc 93-507 at [74 -75]. [48] family law act 1975 (cth), ss 61da(4). [49] family law act 1975 (cth), s 65dac.[50] second family report, paragraph 74. [51] boyle & zahur & anor [2017] famcafc 263; (2017) flc 93-814 at [22]. [52] duarte & another & morse [2019] famcafc 93; (2019) flc 93-902 at [391, 405] and the cases there cited.[53] second family report, paragraph 73. [54] hearne v street [2008] hca 36; (2008) 235 clr 125 per hayne, heydon and crennan jj at [96-97]. [55] sahadi & savva & anor [2016] famcafc 65; (2016) flc 93-704 at [66]. [56] oberlin & infeld (2021) flc 94-071 at [51-52] and the cases there cited.