last updated: 7 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ulmer & herrera [2023] fedcfamc2f 279
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
3. in the exercise of the father’s parental responsibility the father shall:  notify the respondent mother in writing of any decision he intends to make under his exercise of parental responsibility within 14 days prior to making the decision and the mother may provide a response within 7 days and the father will consider the mother’s response before making the final decision, and (b) notify the mother in writing within 7 days of the decision made by the father.   notify the mother in writing within 7 days of the decision made by the father.
information sharing  sign all documents and do all things to transfer authority for the father to deal with the ndis, and (b) provide to the father the details and information about y’s past treating medical practitioners, specialists and therapists/counsellors.   provide to the father the details and information about y’s past treating medical practitioners, specialists and therapists/counsellors.
living and time arrangements  each alternate weekend from friday at 5.00pm or, if she is attending school on friday then from the finish of school, to the commencement of school the following monday, or 9.00am if she is not attending school that day. (b) half of the term school holidays commencing the first week from friday at 5.00pm or, if she is attending school on friday then from the finish of school to the following saturday at 5.00pm. (c) half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months’ notice (prior to the commencement of the holiday period) in writing of their intention to travel with the child during the summer holidays in which case each parent will have a three week block or half the summer holidays. (d) for mother’s day, if it is not a day that she is otherwise spending time with the mother, from 10.00am to 5.00pm, and (i) if father’s day falls on a weekend that y is otherwise spending time with the mother in accordance with these orders, that time is suspended such that y spends time with the father on father’s day from 10.00am to 5.00pm. (e) for no less than 3 hours each year for the mother’s birthday. (f) on christmas day from: (i) 3.00pm christmas day to 3.00pm boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. (ii) 3.00pm christmas eve to 3.00pm christmas day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter. (g) for no less than 2 hours on y’s birthday.   half of the term school holidays commencing the first week from friday at 5.00pm or, if she is attending school on friday then from the finish of school to the following saturday at 5.00pm. (c) half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months’ notice (prior to the commencement of the holiday period) in writing of their intention to travel with the child during the summer holidays in which case each parent will have a three week block or half the summer holidays. (d) for mother’s day, if it is not a day that she is otherwise spending time with the mother, from 10.00am to 5.00pm, and (i) if father’s day falls on a weekend that y is otherwise spending time with the mother in accordance with these orders, that time is suspended such that y spends time with the father on father’s day from 10.00am to 5.00pm. (e) for no less than 3 hours each year for the mother’s birthday. (f) on christmas day from: (i) 3.00pm christmas day to 3.00pm boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. (ii) 3.00pm christmas eve to 3.00pm christmas day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter. (g) for no less than 2 hours on y’s birthday.   half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months’ notice (prior to the commencement of the holiday period) in writing of their intention to travel with the child during the summer holidays in which case each parent will have a three week block or half the summer holidays. (d) for mother’s day, if it is not a day that she is otherwise spending time with the mother, from 10.00am to 5.00pm, and (i) if father’s day falls on a weekend that y is otherwise spending time with the mother in accordance with these orders, that time is suspended such that y spends time with the father on father’s day from 10.00am to 5.00pm. (e) for no less than 3 hours each year for the mother’s birthday. (f) on christmas day from: (i) 3.00pm christmas day to 3.00pm boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. (ii) 3.00pm christmas eve to 3.00pm christmas day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter. (g) for no less than 2 hours on y’s birthday.   for mother’s day, if it is not a day that she is otherwise spending time with the mother, from 10.00am to 5.00pm, and (i) if father’s day falls on a weekend that y is otherwise spending time with the mother in accordance with these orders, that time is suspended such that y spends time with the father on father’s day from 10.00am to 5.00pm. (e) for no less than 3 hours each year for the mother’s birthday. (f) on christmas day from: (i) 3.00pm christmas day to 3.00pm boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. (ii) 3.00pm christmas eve to 3.00pm christmas day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter. (g) for no less than 2 hours on y’s birthday.   if father’s day falls on a weekend that y is otherwise spending time with the mother in accordance with these orders, that time is suspended such that y spends time with the father on father’s day from 10.00am to 5.00pm.   for no less than 3 hours each year for the mother’s birthday. (f) on christmas day from: (i) 3.00pm christmas day to 3.00pm boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. (ii) 3.00pm christmas eve to 3.00pm christmas day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter. (g) for no less than 2 hours on y’s birthday.   on christmas day from: (i) 3.00pm christmas day to 3.00pm boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. (ii) 3.00pm christmas eve to 3.00pm christmas day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter. (g) for no less than 2 hours on y’s birthday.   3.00pm christmas day to 3.00pm boxing day in 2023 and each alternate year thereafter. (ii) 3.00pm christmas eve to 3.00pm christmas day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter.  ) 3.00pm christmas eve to 3.00pm christmas day in 2024 and each alternate year thereafter.   for no less than 2 hours on y’s birthday.
communication
changeovers
restraints and supervision  unless agreed to by the mother, or (b) except in the case of an emergency, or (c) except in the event the mother has withheld y beyond the times provided for in these orders and has ceased to meaningfully communicate with the father.   except in the case of an emergency, or (c) except in the event the mother has withheld y beyond the times provided for in these orders and has ceased to meaningfully communicate with the father.   except in the event the mother has withheld y beyond the times provided for in these orders and has ceased to meaningfully communicate with the father.   denigrating the other party in the presence or hearing of y or permitting any other person to do so in the presence or hearing of y, and (b) discussing the proceedings or any issues of disagreement between the parties in the presence or hearing of y.   discussing the proceedings or any issues of disagreement between the parties in the presence or hearing of y.
reasons for judgment
judge mansfield:
introduction
background  the father to have sole parental responsibility, (b) in the exercise of sole parental responsibility the father shall provide the mother with all names and contact details of medical practitioners the child attends upon, (c) authorising the mother and father to obtain any medical and educational information from treating practitioners and educational providers, (d) authorising both parents to attend any extra-curricular or school activity usually attended by parents, (e) in the event of a medical emergency the parent is to advise the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable, (f) if any medication prescribed to x differs from the usual course, the other parent will ensure that this information and instructions are passed on to the other, (g) x to spend time with the mother as agreed and failing agreement as follows: (i) each alternate weekend from after school friday to sunday at 5:00pm, (ii) half of the term school holidays, (iii) half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months notice in writing of their intention to travel with the child, in which case the parent will have a 3 week block or half of the summer holidays, (iv) for mother’s day if it not already a day the child will be spending time with the mother, (v) time on the mother’s birthday, christmas day and x’s birthday. (h) video call communication between the child and the mother each wednesday at 7:00pm until 7:30pm, (i) changeovers to take place at suburb d mcdonalds if not occurring at school if the mother resides in city e, or if the mother is residing elsewhere, an agreed midpoint between the parties’ households, (j) the parents are to communicate in writing by way of a parenting app.   in the exercise of sole parental responsibility the father shall provide the mother with all names and contact details of medical practitioners the child attends upon, (c) authorising the mother and father to obtain any medical and educational information from treating practitioners and educational providers, (d) authorising both parents to attend any extra-curricular or school activity usually attended by parents, (e) in the event of a medical emergency the parent is to advise the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable, (f) if any medication prescribed to x differs from the usual course, the other parent will ensure that this information and instructions are passed on to the other, (g) x to spend time with the mother as agreed and failing agreement as follows: (i) each alternate weekend from after school friday to sunday at 5:00pm, (ii) half of the term school holidays, (iii) half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months notice in writing of their intention to travel with the child, in which case the parent will have a 3 week block or half of the summer holidays, (iv) for mother’s day if it not already a day the child will be spending time with the mother, (v) time on the mother’s birthday, christmas day and x’s birthday. (h) video call communication between the child and the mother each wednesday at 7:00pm until 7:30pm, (i) changeovers to take place at suburb d mcdonalds if not occurring at school if the mother resides in city e, or if the mother is residing elsewhere, an agreed midpoint between the parties’ households, (j) the parents are to communicate in writing by way of a parenting app.   authorising the mother and father to obtain any medical and educational information from treating practitioners and educational providers, (d) authorising both parents to attend any extra-curricular or school activity usually attended by parents, (e) in the event of a medical emergency the parent is to advise the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable, (f) if any medication prescribed to x differs from the usual course, the other parent will ensure that this information and instructions are passed on to the other, (g) x to spend time with the mother as agreed and failing agreement as follows: (i) each alternate weekend from after school friday to sunday at 5:00pm, (ii) half of the term school holidays, (iii) half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months notice in writing of their intention to travel with the child, in which case the parent will have a 3 week block or half of the summer holidays, (iv) for mother’s day if it not already a day the child will be spending time with the mother, (v) time on the mother’s birthday, christmas day and x’s birthday. (h) video call communication between the child and the mother each wednesday at 7:00pm until 7:30pm, (i) changeovers to take place at suburb d mcdonalds if not occurring at school if the mother resides in city e, or if the mother is residing elsewhere, an agreed midpoint between the parties’ households, (j) the parents are to communicate in writing by way of a parenting app.   authorising both parents to attend any extra-curricular or school activity usually attended by parents, (e) in the event of a medical emergency the parent is to advise the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable, (f) if any medication prescribed to x differs from the usual course, the other parent will ensure that this information and instructions are passed on to the other, (g) x to spend time with the mother as agreed and failing agreement as follows: (i) each alternate weekend from after school friday to sunday at 5:00pm, (ii) half of the term school holidays, (iii) half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months notice in writing of their intention to travel with the child, in which case the parent will have a 3 week block or half of the summer holidays, (iv) for mother’s day if it not already a day the child will be spending time with the mother, (v) time on the mother’s birthday, christmas day and x’s birthday. (h) video call communication between the child and the mother each wednesday at 7:00pm until 7:30pm, (i) changeovers to take place at suburb d mcdonalds if not occurring at school if the mother resides in city e, or if the mother is residing elsewhere, an agreed midpoint between the parties’ households, (j) the parents are to communicate in writing by way of a parenting app.   in the event of a medical emergency the parent is to advise the other parent as soon as reasonably practicable, (f) if any medication prescribed to x differs from the usual course, the other parent will ensure that this information and instructions are passed on to the other, (g) x to spend time with the mother as agreed and failing agreement as follows: (i) each alternate weekend from after school friday to sunday at 5:00pm, (ii) half of the term school holidays, (iii) half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months notice in writing of their intention to travel with the child, in which case the parent will have a 3 week block or half of the summer holidays, (iv) for mother’s day if it not already a day the child will be spending time with the mother, (v) time on the mother’s birthday, christmas day and x’s birthday. (h) video call communication between the child and the mother each wednesday at 7:00pm until 7:30pm, (i) changeovers to take place at suburb d mcdonalds if not occurring at school if the mother resides in city e, or if the mother is residing elsewhere, an agreed midpoint between the parties’ households, (j) the parents are to communicate in writing by way of a parenting app.   if any medication prescribed to x differs from the usual course, the other parent will ensure that this information and instructions are passed on to the other, (g) x to spend time with the mother as agreed and failing agreement as follows: (i) each alternate weekend from after school friday to sunday at 5:00pm, (ii) half of the term school holidays, (iii) half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months notice in writing of their intention to travel with the child, in which case the parent will have a 3 week block or half of the summer holidays, (iv) for mother’s day if it not already a day the child will be spending time with the mother, (v) time on the mother’s birthday, christmas day and x’s birthday. (h) video call communication between the child and the mother each wednesday at 7:00pm until 7:30pm, (i) changeovers to take place at suburb d mcdonalds if not occurring at school if the mother resides in city e, or if the mother is residing elsewhere, an agreed midpoint between the parties’ households, (j) the parents are to communicate in writing by way of a parenting app.   x to spend time with the mother as agreed and failing agreement as follows: (i) each alternate weekend from after school friday to sunday at 5:00pm, (ii) half of the term school holidays, (iii) half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months notice in writing of their intention to travel with the child, in which case the parent will have a 3 week block or half of the summer holidays, (iv) for mother’s day if it not already a day the child will be spending time with the mother, (v) time on the mother’s birthday, christmas day and x’s birthday. (h) video call communication between the child and the mother each wednesday at 7:00pm until 7:30pm, (i) changeovers to take place at suburb d mcdonalds if not occurring at school if the mother resides in city e, or if the mother is residing elsewhere, an agreed midpoint between the parties’ households, (j) the parents are to communicate in writing by way of a parenting app.   each alternate weekend from after school friday to sunday at 5:00pm, (ii) half of the term school holidays, (iii) half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months notice in writing of their intention to travel with the child, in which case the parent will have a 3 week block or half of the summer holidays, (iv) for mother’s day if it not already a day the child will be spending time with the mother, (v) time on the mother’s birthday, christmas day and x’s birthday.  ) half of the term school holidays, (iii) half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months notice in writing of their intention to travel with the child, in which case the parent will have a 3 week block or half of the summer holidays, (iv) for mother’s day if it not already a day the child will be spending time with the mother, (v) time on the mother’s birthday, christmas day and x’s birthday.  i) half of the summer school holidays on a week about rotation commencing in the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter unless either parent gives the other 3 months notice in writing of their intention to travel with the child, in which case the parent will have a 3 week block or half of the summer holidays, (iv) for mother’s day if it not already a day the child will be spending time with the mother, (v) time on the mother’s birthday, christmas day and x’s birthday.  ) for mother’s day if it not already a day the child will be spending time with the mother, (v) time on the mother’s birthday, christmas day and x’s birthday.   time on the mother’s birthday, christmas day and x’s birthday.   video call communication between the child and the mother each wednesday at 7:00pm until 7:30pm, (i) changeovers to take place at suburb d mcdonalds if not occurring at school if the mother resides in city e, or if the mother is residing elsewhere, an agreed midpoint between the parties’ households, (j) the parents are to communicate in writing by way of a parenting app.   changeovers to take place at suburb d mcdonalds if not occurring at school if the mother resides in city e, or if the mother is residing elsewhere, an agreed midpoint between the parties’ households, (j) the parents are to communicate in writing by way of a parenting app.   the parents are to communicate in writing by way of a parenting app.
orders sought  for the father to have sole parental responsibility, (b) for y to live with the father and spend time with the mother: (i) if the mother relocates to adelaide: each alternate week from friday after school to tuesday before school, and for one half of the school holiday period. (ii) if the mother does not relocate to adelaide, for one half of the school holiday period and at other times as agreed.   for y to live with the father and spend time with the mother: (i) if the mother relocates to adelaide: each alternate week from friday after school to tuesday before school, and for one half of the school holiday period. (ii) if the mother does not relocate to adelaide, for one half of the school holiday period and at other times as agreed.   if the mother relocates to adelaide: each alternate week from friday after school to tuesday before school, and for one half of the school holiday period. (ii) if the mother does not relocate to adelaide, for one half of the school holiday period and at other times as agreed.  ) if the mother does not relocate to adelaide, for one half of the school holiday period and at other times as agreed.   for the mother to have sole parental responsibility, (b) for y to live with the mother and spend time with the father: (i) each alternate weekend when x is with the father from friday to sunday, and for half of all school holidays.   for y to live with the mother and spend time with the father: (i) each alternate weekend when x is with the father from friday to sunday, and for half of all school holidays.   each alternate weekend when x is with the father from friday to sunday, and for half of all school holidays.
the hearing  affidavit of mr ulmer filed 12 october 2022 (‘exhibit a1’), (b) pages 99-115 of the icl tender bundle (‘exhibit a2’), (c) n region policing case summary ... (‘exhibit a3’), (d) email from applicant father to respondent mother dated 27 september 2022 (‘exhibit a4’), (e) map illustrating a 15km radius from the father’s residence in adelaide (‘exhibit a5’), (f) affidavit of ms herrera filed 3 november 2022 (‘exhibit r1’), (g) certificate for completion of g course dated 25 october 2022 (‘exhibit r2’), (h) expert report of dr f dated 22 december 2021 (‘exhibit c1’), and (i) pages 2-5 and 200-240 of the icl tender bundle (‘exhibit c2’).   pages 99-115 of the icl tender bundle (‘exhibit a2’), (c) n region policing case summary ... (‘exhibit a3’), (d) email from applicant father to respondent mother dated 27 september 2022 (‘exhibit a4’), (e) map illustrating a 15km radius from the father’s residence in adelaide (‘exhibit a5’), (f) affidavit of ms herrera filed 3 november 2022 (‘exhibit r1’), (g) certificate for completion of g course dated 25 october 2022 (‘exhibit r2’), (h) expert report of dr f dated 22 december 2021 (‘exhibit c1’), and (i) pages 2-5 and 200-240 of the icl tender bundle (‘exhibit c2’).   n region policing case summary ... (‘exhibit a3’), (d) email from applicant father to respondent mother dated 27 september 2022 (‘exhibit a4’), (e) map illustrating a 15km radius from the father’s residence in adelaide (‘exhibit a5’), (f) affidavit of ms herrera filed 3 november 2022 (‘exhibit r1’), (g) certificate for completion of g course dated 25 october 2022 (‘exhibit r2’), (h) expert report of dr f dated 22 december 2021 (‘exhibit c1’), and (i) pages 2-5 and 200-240 of the icl tender bundle (‘exhibit c2’).   email from applicant father to respondent mother dated 27 september 2022 (‘exhibit a4’), (e) map illustrating a 15km radius from the father’s residence in adelaide (‘exhibit a5’), (f) affidavit of ms herrera filed 3 november 2022 (‘exhibit r1’), (g) certificate for completion of g course dated 25 october 2022 (‘exhibit r2’), (h) expert report of dr f dated 22 december 2021 (‘exhibit c1’), and (i) pages 2-5 and 200-240 of the icl tender bundle (‘exhibit c2’).   map illustrating a 15km radius from the father’s residence in adelaide (‘exhibit a5’), (f) affidavit of ms herrera filed 3 november 2022 (‘exhibit r1’), (g) certificate for completion of g course dated 25 october 2022 (‘exhibit r2’), (h) expert report of dr f dated 22 december 2021 (‘exhibit c1’), and (i) pages 2-5 and 200-240 of the icl tender bundle (‘exhibit c2’).   affidavit of ms herrera filed 3 november 2022 (‘exhibit r1’), (g) certificate for completion of g course dated 25 october 2022 (‘exhibit r2’), (h) expert report of dr f dated 22 december 2021 (‘exhibit c1’), and (i) pages 2-5 and 200-240 of the icl tender bundle (‘exhibit c2’).   certificate for completion of g course dated 25 october 2022 (‘exhibit r2’), (h) expert report of dr f dated 22 december 2021 (‘exhibit c1’), and (i) pages 2-5 and 200-240 of the icl tender bundle (‘exhibit c2’).   expert report of dr f dated 22 december 2021 (‘exhibit c1’), and (i) pages 2-5 and 200-240 of the icl tender bundle (‘exhibit c2’).   pages 2-5 and 200-240 of the icl tender bundle (‘exhibit c2’).   case outline filed 3 november 2022.   case outline filed 7 november 2022, and (b) minute of orders sought handed up on 9 november 2022.   minute of orders sought handed up on 9 november 2022.
issues  for the father to have sole parental responsibility, (b) that in the exercise of this parental responsibility the father will keep the mother informed with all details pertaining to medical practitioners and treatment, similarly with educational providers, (c) for y to live with the parties in adelaide on a week about arrangement from after school friday to the following friday, (d) for changeover to occur at the suburb d mcdonald carpark if the mother is residing in city e and if not residing in city e, then an agreed midpoint between the father’s and mother’s residence, (e) for the school holiday time relating to y to mirror the holiday time spent between the parents and x, (f) if y is to be in another person’s care for more than 24 hours, the parent will inform the other, and (g) if y is spending more than two consecutive nights with the mother or father at a location other than their residential address, the parent is to inform the other.   that in the exercise of this parental responsibility the father will keep the mother informed with all details pertaining to medical practitioners and treatment, similarly with educational providers, (c) for y to live with the parties in adelaide on a week about arrangement from after school friday to the following friday, (d) for changeover to occur at the suburb d mcdonald carpark if the mother is residing in city e and if not residing in city e, then an agreed midpoint between the father’s and mother’s residence, (e) for the school holiday time relating to y to mirror the holiday time spent between the parents and x, (f) if y is to be in another person’s care for more than 24 hours, the parent will inform the other, and (g) if y is spending more than two consecutive nights with the mother or father at a location other than their residential address, the parent is to inform the other.   for y to live with the parties in adelaide on a week about arrangement from after school friday to the following friday, (d) for changeover to occur at the suburb d mcdonald carpark if the mother is residing in city e and if not residing in city e, then an agreed midpoint between the father’s and mother’s residence, (e) for the school holiday time relating to y to mirror the holiday time spent between the parents and x, (f) if y is to be in another person’s care for more than 24 hours, the parent will inform the other, and (g) if y is spending more than two consecutive nights with the mother or father at a location other than their residential address, the parent is to inform the other.   for changeover to occur at the suburb d mcdonald carpark if the mother is residing in city e and if not residing in city e, then an agreed midpoint between the father’s and mother’s residence, (e) for the school holiday time relating to y to mirror the holiday time spent between the parents and x, (f) if y is to be in another person’s care for more than 24 hours, the parent will inform the other, and (g) if y is spending more than two consecutive nights with the mother or father at a location other than their residential address, the parent is to inform the other.   for the school holiday time relating to y to mirror the holiday time spent between the parents and x, (f) if y is to be in another person’s care for more than 24 hours, the parent will inform the other, and (g) if y is spending more than two consecutive nights with the mother or father at a location other than their residential address, the parent is to inform the other.   if y is to be in another person’s care for more than 24 hours, the parent will inform the other, and (g) if y is spending more than two consecutive nights with the mother or father at a location other than their residential address, the parent is to inform the other.   if y is spending more than two consecutive nights with the mother or father at a location other than their residential address, the parent is to inform the other.   maintained his position and agreed with the icl that he ought to have sole parental responsibility and agreed with the information sharing provisions as sought, (b) changed his position in relation to time with the mother from friday to tuesday such that if the mother resides within a 15km radius of the father’s residence, that y should live week about between the parents, alternatively, if she lives outside of this radius but within adelaide, y should spend time with the mother from friday after school to tuesday before school, and in the event the mother does not reside in adelaide, for half of the school holidays, (c) maintained that changeovers occur at y’s school or if not at the school, at suburb b mcdonalds as it is closer to the father’s residence than suburb d (as sought by the mother), (d) maintained his position on restraints, (e) maintained his position that the parents be restrained from leaving y unsupervised, requiring the written consent of any supervisors outside of blood relatives with the carer’s details to be provided, and requiring both parties to provide the information of any other adult who spends time when in the home with the children and requiring notification to the non-resident parent of y spending more than one night away from home and the contact details of where she is staying.   changed his position in relation to time with the mother from friday to tuesday such that if the mother resides within a 15km radius of the father’s residence, that y should live week about between the parents, alternatively, if she lives outside of this radius but within adelaide, y should spend time with the mother from friday after school to tuesday before school, and in the event the mother does not reside in adelaide, for half of the school holidays, (c) maintained that changeovers occur at y’s school or if not at the school, at suburb b mcdonalds as it is closer to the father’s residence than suburb d (as sought by the mother), (d) maintained his position on restraints, (e) maintained his position that the parents be restrained from leaving y unsupervised, requiring the written consent of any supervisors outside of blood relatives with the carer’s details to be provided, and requiring both parties to provide the information of any other adult who spends time when in the home with the children and requiring notification to the non-resident parent of y spending more than one night away from home and the contact details of where she is staying.   maintained that changeovers occur at y’s school or if not at the school, at suburb b mcdonalds as it is closer to the father’s residence than suburb d (as sought by the mother), (d) maintained his position on restraints, (e) maintained his position that the parents be restrained from leaving y unsupervised, requiring the written consent of any supervisors outside of blood relatives with the carer’s details to be provided, and requiring both parties to provide the information of any other adult who spends time when in the home with the children and requiring notification to the non-resident parent of y spending more than one night away from home and the contact details of where she is staying.   maintained his position on restraints, (e) maintained his position that the parents be restrained from leaving y unsupervised, requiring the written consent of any supervisors outside of blood relatives with the carer’s details to be provided, and requiring both parties to provide the information of any other adult who spends time when in the home with the children and requiring notification to the non-resident parent of y spending more than one night away from home and the contact details of where she is staying.   maintained his position that the parents be restrained from leaving y unsupervised, requiring the written consent of any supervisors outside of blood relatives with the carer’s details to be provided, and requiring both parties to provide the information of any other adult who spends time when in the home with the children and requiring notification to the non-resident parent of y spending more than one night away from home and the contact details of where she is staying.   now proposed equal shared parental responsibility, (b) sought that the mother be provided with written notification of any decision made by the father, (c) otherwise broadly agreed with the orders as sought with regards to medical and educational information, changeovers and special occasion time.   sought that the mother be provided with written notification of any decision made by the father, (c) otherwise broadly agreed with the orders as sought with regards to medical and educational information, changeovers and special occasion time.   otherwise broadly agreed with the orders as sought with regards to medical and educational information, changeovers and special occasion time.   allocation of parental responsibility, (ii) time arrangements which flow from the allocation of parental responsibility, (iii) changeover location, and (iv) extent of reporting about supervision of y when in each parents care.  ) time arrangements which flow from the allocation of parental responsibility, (iii) changeover location, and (iv) extent of reporting about supervision of y when in each parents care.  i) changeover location, and (iv) extent of reporting about supervision of y when in each parents care.  ) extent of reporting about supervision of y when in each parents care.
interim orders made on final day of hearing   the father have sole parental responsibility for y including her enrolment in school for 2023, (b) there be mandatory notification and provision of education and medical information between the parents, (c) a regime for time between the father and y until 6 january 2023, (d) liberty to the father to relist on an urgent basis for consideration of a recovery order in the event the mother had not relocated y’s residence to adelaide by 6 january 2023, (e) a regime for time from 6 january 2023 to the start of term 1 2023, (f) that y live with the parents week about thereafter and for half of the school holidays, (g) that the parents communicate through a parenting app, (h) mutual restraints on the parents in unremarkable terms, (i) mutual obligations to share details of other adults supervising, caring for or living with y, (j) for the mother is to complete the g course by the j organisation.   there be mandatory notification and provision of education and medical information between the parents, (c) a regime for time between the father and y until 6 january 2023, (d) liberty to the father to relist on an urgent basis for consideration of a recovery order in the event the mother had not relocated y’s residence to adelaide by 6 january 2023, (e) a regime for time from 6 january 2023 to the start of term 1 2023, (f) that y live with the parents week about thereafter and for half of the school holidays, (g) that the parents communicate through a parenting app, (h) mutual restraints on the parents in unremarkable terms, (i) mutual obligations to share details of other adults supervising, caring for or living with y, (j) for the mother is to complete the g course by the j organisation.   a regime for time between the father and y until 6 january 2023, (d) liberty to the father to relist on an urgent basis for consideration of a recovery order in the event the mother had not relocated y’s residence to adelaide by 6 january 2023, (e) a regime for time from 6 january 2023 to the start of term 1 2023, (f) that y live with the parents week about thereafter and for half of the school holidays, (g) that the parents communicate through a parenting app, (h) mutual restraints on the parents in unremarkable terms, (i) mutual obligations to share details of other adults supervising, caring for or living with y, (j) for the mother is to complete the g course by the j organisation.   liberty to the father to relist on an urgent basis for consideration of a recovery order in the event the mother had not relocated y’s residence to adelaide by 6 january 2023, (e) a regime for time from 6 january 2023 to the start of term 1 2023, (f) that y live with the parents week about thereafter and for half of the school holidays, (g) that the parents communicate through a parenting app, (h) mutual restraints on the parents in unremarkable terms, (i) mutual obligations to share details of other adults supervising, caring for or living with y, (j) for the mother is to complete the g course by the j organisation.   a regime for time from 6 january 2023 to the start of term 1 2023, (f) that y live with the parents week about thereafter and for half of the school holidays, (g) that the parents communicate through a parenting app, (h) mutual restraints on the parents in unremarkable terms, (i) mutual obligations to share details of other adults supervising, caring for or living with y, (j) for the mother is to complete the g course by the j organisation.   that y live with the parents week about thereafter and for half of the school holidays, (g) that the parents communicate through a parenting app, (h) mutual restraints on the parents in unremarkable terms, (i) mutual obligations to share details of other adults supervising, caring for or living with y, (j) for the mother is to complete the g course by the j organisation.   that the parents communicate through a parenting app, (h) mutual restraints on the parents in unremarkable terms, (i) mutual obligations to share details of other adults supervising, caring for or living with y, (j) for the mother is to complete the g course by the j organisation.   mutual restraints on the parents in unremarkable terms, (i) mutual obligations to share details of other adults supervising, caring for or living with y, (j) for the mother is to complete the g course by the j organisation.   mutual obligations to share details of other adults supervising, caring for or living with y, (j) for the mother is to complete the g course by the j organisation.   for the mother is to complete the g course by the j organisation.
application in proceeding
preliminary matters  determining the manner in which the evidence and submissions of the parties on the father’s application in proceeding would be taken into account, and (ii) on 6 march 2023, the mother sent an email to the court seeking to adjourn the hearing of the application in proceeding to sometime in april 2023 in order to obtain legal representation. the mother confirmed on 7 march 2023 that application was pressed.  ) on 6 march 2023, the mother sent an email to the court seeking to adjourn the hearing of the application in proceeding to sometime in april 2023 in order to obtain legal representation. the mother confirmed on 7 march 2023 that application was pressed.
determining the application as an application to re-open  principle 1 -- that the court is to consider the needs of the child concerned and the impact that the conduct of proceedings may have on the child in determining the conduct of the proceedings. i am satisfied that a further adjournment of the hearing of the application and the proceedings will have a negative impact on y. (b) principle 3 --that a further adjournment of the proceedings will likely continue y’s exposure to the conflict between her parents. (c) principle 4 -- that an adjournment will not promote cooperative and child focussed parenting as between the parties. (d) principle 5 -- that the proceedings are to be conducted without undue delay and with as little formality, technicality and form as possible.   principle 3 --that a further adjournment of the proceedings will likely continue y’s exposure to the conflict between her parents. (c) principle 4 -- that an adjournment will not promote cooperative and child focussed parenting as between the parties. (d) principle 5 -- that the proceedings are to be conducted without undue delay and with as little formality, technicality and form as possible.   principle 4 -- that an adjournment will not promote cooperative and child focussed parenting as between the parties. (d) principle 5 -- that the proceedings are to be conducted without undue delay and with as little formality, technicality and form as possible.   principle 5 -- that the proceedings are to be conducted without undue delay and with as little formality, technicality and form as possible.
to admit further evidence where the hearing has concluded but judgment has not been delivered on the following grounds: (a) the further evidence is so material that the interests of justice require its admission, (b) the further evidence, if accepted, would most probably effect the result of the case, (c) the further evidence could not by reasonable diligence have been discovered earlier, (d) no prejudice would ensue to the other party by reason of the late admission of the further evidence.[1]   the further evidence is so material that the interests of justice require its admission, (b) the further evidence, if accepted, would most probably effect the result of the case, (c) the further evidence could not by reasonable diligence have been discovered earlier, (d) no prejudice would ensue to the other party by reason of the late admission of the further evidence.[1]   the further evidence, if accepted, would most probably effect the result of the case, (c) the further evidence could not by reasonable diligence have been discovered earlier, (d) no prejudice would ensue to the other party by reason of the late admission of the further evidence.[1]   the further evidence could not by reasonable diligence have been discovered earlier, (d) no prejudice would ensue to the other party by reason of the late admission of the further evidence.[1]   no prejudice would ensue to the other party by reason of the late admission of the further evidence.[1]
the mother’s application for an adjournment  in this case, the adjournment was sought principally to obtain legal representation and avoid being cross-examined by the father personally, (b) on the directions i had made, that was not going to happen in any event, (c) the parties had complied with the directions made for the hearing of the application, (d) there was no evidence that demonstrated that the wife was prevented in some way from obtaining the representation that she desired, and (e) granting of the adjournment would have been an injustice to the father and the icl.   on the directions i had made, that was not going to happen in any event, (c) the parties had complied with the directions made for the hearing of the application, (d) there was no evidence that demonstrated that the wife was prevented in some way from obtaining the representation that she desired, and (e) granting of the adjournment would have been an injustice to the father and the icl.   the parties had complied with the directions made for the hearing of the application, (d) there was no evidence that demonstrated that the wife was prevented in some way from obtaining the representation that she desired, and (e) granting of the adjournment would have been an injustice to the father and the icl.   there was no evidence that demonstrated that the wife was prevented in some way from obtaining the representation that she desired, and (e) granting of the adjournment would have been an injustice to the father and the icl.   granting of the adjournment would have been an injustice to the father and the icl.
further material and submissions  application in a proceeding filed by mr ulmer on 8 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-1’), (b) affidavit of mr ulmer filed 8 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-2’), (c) affidavit of mr ulmer filed 22 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-3’), (d) response to aip filed by ms herrera filed 27 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-4’), (e) affidavit of ms herrera filed 27 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-5’), (f) affidavit of mr ulmer filed 1 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-6’), (g) south australia civil and administrative tribunal letter dated 3 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-7’), and (h) south australia civil and administrative tribunal hardship or domestic violence form of 8 pages (‘exhibit aip-8’).   affidavit of mr ulmer filed 8 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-2’), (c) affidavit of mr ulmer filed 22 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-3’), (d) response to aip filed by ms herrera filed 27 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-4’), (e) affidavit of ms herrera filed 27 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-5’), (f) affidavit of mr ulmer filed 1 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-6’), (g) south australia civil and administrative tribunal letter dated 3 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-7’), and (h) south australia civil and administrative tribunal hardship or domestic violence form of 8 pages (‘exhibit aip-8’).   affidavit of mr ulmer filed 22 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-3’), (d) response to aip filed by ms herrera filed 27 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-4’), (e) affidavit of ms herrera filed 27 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-5’), (f) affidavit of mr ulmer filed 1 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-6’), (g) south australia civil and administrative tribunal letter dated 3 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-7’), and (h) south australia civil and administrative tribunal hardship or domestic violence form of 8 pages (‘exhibit aip-8’).   response to aip filed by ms herrera filed 27 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-4’), (e) affidavit of ms herrera filed 27 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-5’), (f) affidavit of mr ulmer filed 1 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-6’), (g) south australia civil and administrative tribunal letter dated 3 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-7’), and (h) south australia civil and administrative tribunal hardship or domestic violence form of 8 pages (‘exhibit aip-8’).   affidavit of ms herrera filed 27 february 2023 (‘exhibit aip-5’), (f) affidavit of mr ulmer filed 1 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-6’), (g) south australia civil and administrative tribunal letter dated 3 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-7’), and (h) south australia civil and administrative tribunal hardship or domestic violence form of 8 pages (‘exhibit aip-8’).   affidavit of mr ulmer filed 1 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-6’), (g) south australia civil and administrative tribunal letter dated 3 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-7’), and (h) south australia civil and administrative tribunal hardship or domestic violence form of 8 pages (‘exhibit aip-8’).   south australia civil and administrative tribunal letter dated 3 march 2023 (‘exhibit aip-7’), and (h) south australia civil and administrative tribunal hardship or domestic violence form of 8 pages (‘exhibit aip-8’).   south australia civil and administrative tribunal hardship or domestic violence form of 8 pages (‘exhibit aip-8’).   case outline filed 6 march 2023.   minute of final orders sought dated 7 march 2023.
legal principles  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm arising from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm arising from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   the child’s education (both current and future), and (b) the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s religious and cultural upbringing, and (c) the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s health, and (d) the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   the child’s name, and (e) changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.   changes to the child’s living arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for the child to spend time with a parent.
the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
best interests of the child  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
determination of parental responsibility
the volume of communication that happened last year from me was unhelpful for [ms herrera]. i guess it triggered her distress, and – and that didn’t help because then we were at – at loggerheads. i mean, i was catch-22. i had to get this – i had to get [y’s] supports in place and the – and the specialists, but – but i copped flak – flak for it. so – so i – i – i – i learned from that, and i thought, “okay. well, i will – i will – i will,” – i wanted us to have a transition plan.   both parents reported to the family consultant they find communication with the other parent less than desirable. the mother reported that ‘she was unwilling to co-parent with [mr ulmer] and no longer wished to play his power games...although [s]he [sic] asserted that communication was required for the children, it was her view that since 2018 this was not possible’. under cross-examination, the report writer clarified, with reference to contemporaneous notes, that the mother expressed she did want to have a co-parenting relationship with mr ulmer, but that it was not possible. (b) while asserting they are willing and able to facilitate a close and continuing relationship with the other parent, the mother has on a number of occasions failed to insist upon regular contact between x and the father and additionally has failed to comply with the consent orders providing for her to relocate to adelaide with y, having the result of impacting regular contact between y and the father. (c) the parents have failed to jointly make decisions about a number of major long term issues in relation to the children including the vaccination status of x and y, some major health procedures for y and where y was to go school in adelaide.   while asserting they are willing and able to facilitate a close and continuing relationship with the other parent, the mother has on a number of occasions failed to insist upon regular contact between x and the father and additionally has failed to comply with the consent orders providing for her to relocate to adelaide with y, having the result of impacting regular contact between y and the father. (c) the parents have failed to jointly make decisions about a number of major long term issues in relation to the children including the vaccination status of x and y, some major health procedures for y and where y was to go school in adelaide.   the parents have failed to jointly make decisions about a number of major long term issues in relation to the children including the vaccination status of x and y, some major health procedures for y and where y was to go school in adelaide.
and i think that highlights the – as a case in point highlights the, you know, problem associated with the mother having sole parental responsibility for [y’s] care. and, if one looks at [x’s] experience, there had been very similar issues related to [x’s] school attendance and the management of his developmental needs, and there has already been the lived experience on the – on [x] being placed in – in the father’s care where, rather than there being a catastrophic outcome as predicted by the mother, that there has been a positive outcome with regard to [x’s] attendance at school, engagement in activities, which had just not been happening for an extended period in the mother’s care. and so, on balance, based on the additional material that i have been provided with and my reading of the affidavits of the parties, it would be my recommendation that the father is granted sole parental responsibility, based on the information that i have to hand.   being satisfied that y has the benefit of a meaningful relationship with both of her parents. i take into account that the father has lived in adelaide since early 2022 and y had lived with her mother in c town prior to that time, (b) the demonstrated longstanding quantum of y’s absenteeism from school whilst in the mother’s care, (c) the mother’s misreading and delay in dealing with the child’s sexualised behaviours and reproductive health, (d) the mother’s extensive delay in attending to immunisations, (e) the underutilisation and under engagement by the mother with the ndis, (f) the mother’s non-compliance with the consent orders to relocate in 2022, (g) the mother’s repeated and ongoing non-compliance with consent orders in relation to communication with the father in a high conflict post-separation environment, (h) the remarkable success of x’s educational and social development since coming into the care of his father in january 2022, and (i) the mother’s inability to provide permanent and stable accommodation for herself and the children in adelaide despite agreeing to move to adelaide at least 14 months ago.   the demonstrated longstanding quantum of y’s absenteeism from school whilst in the mother’s care, (c) the mother’s misreading and delay in dealing with the child’s sexualised behaviours and reproductive health, (d) the mother’s extensive delay in attending to immunisations, (e) the underutilisation and under engagement by the mother with the ndis, (f) the mother’s non-compliance with the consent orders to relocate in 2022, (g) the mother’s repeated and ongoing non-compliance with consent orders in relation to communication with the father in a high conflict post-separation environment, (h) the remarkable success of x’s educational and social development since coming into the care of his father in january 2022, and (i) the mother’s inability to provide permanent and stable accommodation for herself and the children in adelaide despite agreeing to move to adelaide at least 14 months ago.   the mother’s misreading and delay in dealing with the child’s sexualised behaviours and reproductive health, (d) the mother’s extensive delay in attending to immunisations, (e) the underutilisation and under engagement by the mother with the ndis, (f) the mother’s non-compliance with the consent orders to relocate in 2022, (g) the mother’s repeated and ongoing non-compliance with consent orders in relation to communication with the father in a high conflict post-separation environment, (h) the remarkable success of x’s educational and social development since coming into the care of his father in january 2022, and (i) the mother’s inability to provide permanent and stable accommodation for herself and the children in adelaide despite agreeing to move to adelaide at least 14 months ago.   the mother’s extensive delay in attending to immunisations, (e) the underutilisation and under engagement by the mother with the ndis, (f) the mother’s non-compliance with the consent orders to relocate in 2022, (g) the mother’s repeated and ongoing non-compliance with consent orders in relation to communication with the father in a high conflict post-separation environment, (h) the remarkable success of x’s educational and social development since coming into the care of his father in january 2022, and (i) the mother’s inability to provide permanent and stable accommodation for herself and the children in adelaide despite agreeing to move to adelaide at least 14 months ago.   the underutilisation and under engagement by the mother with the ndis, (f) the mother’s non-compliance with the consent orders to relocate in 2022, (g) the mother’s repeated and ongoing non-compliance with consent orders in relation to communication with the father in a high conflict post-separation environment, (h) the remarkable success of x’s educational and social development since coming into the care of his father in january 2022, and (i) the mother’s inability to provide permanent and stable accommodation for herself and the children in adelaide despite agreeing to move to adelaide at least 14 months ago.   the mother’s non-compliance with the consent orders to relocate in 2022, (g) the mother’s repeated and ongoing non-compliance with consent orders in relation to communication with the father in a high conflict post-separation environment, (h) the remarkable success of x’s educational and social development since coming into the care of his father in january 2022, and (i) the mother’s inability to provide permanent and stable accommodation for herself and the children in adelaide despite agreeing to move to adelaide at least 14 months ago.   the mother’s repeated and ongoing non-compliance with consent orders in relation to communication with the father in a high conflict post-separation environment, (h) the remarkable success of x’s educational and social development since coming into the care of his father in january 2022, and (i) the mother’s inability to provide permanent and stable accommodation for herself and the children in adelaide despite agreeing to move to adelaide at least 14 months ago.   the remarkable success of x’s educational and social development since coming into the care of his father in january 2022, and (i) the mother’s inability to provide permanent and stable accommodation for herself and the children in adelaide despite agreeing to move to adelaide at least 14 months ago.   the mother’s inability to provide permanent and stable accommodation for herself and the children in adelaide despite agreeing to move to adelaide at least 14 months ago.
determination of time arrangements
just letting you know that i’ll be in adelaide by early afternoon sunday22 jan. i would like to pick up the kids approx. [...] on sun 22 jan from [mcdonalds suburb h] and have them for 3 days together. staying [...] in town. i’ll drop [x] off after that and head to [ms k’s] with [y]. i will be sharehousing with another single mum, [ms k] (who you know) in [l town] until my place becomes available. thankfully i have work back [...]. there is an opportunity to bring this work with me in the coming months to adelaide however for the immediate future it involves travelling back and forth a bit. this will need us to go back to your original idea of 2 weeks on 2 weeks off shared care this will facilitate my income in the interim. if we could start this arrangement from the date i pick the kids up this would help me out financially and enable the kids and everyone being looked after. are you able to support this? i am keen to work with you for what’s best for the children and to help make them feel secure.   herrera]: you are expected by me, the court, the kids and the legal counsel and parties to the final hearing to relocate to adelaide, find appropriate accommodation, and generally provide a stable base of [y] near to [suburb m] and [y’s] school, so that her support workers can provide consistent weekly support to her and that she can attend therapy sessions and other supports which are all located nearby. this is not consistent with the proposal you are putting forward.   that “it would be harmful for [y] to move away from fifty fifty care because i am her mother and i’m entitled to have her fifty fifty.” (b) that “i didn’t create the housing crisis in adelaide but i feel like i am being penalised.” (c) that she sought a further adjournment of these proceedings in order to present further evidence of the outcome, once it is known, of her application to the south australia civil and administrative tribunal to terminate the lease early in order to move into the property in adelaide that she owns. (d) that she questioned x in 2021 about her beliefs that the father was telling x that “mum is unwell” and her current and ongoing beliefs that the father is still telling x this. (e) that “i don’t have the energy and tenacity of the father, that doesn’t mean i should be punished and have the children taken away from me.” (f) that “i have a right to enjoy my children, just like any mother and any parent.” (g) in response to the icl’s position that the father’s communications are not aggressive or coercive and do not necessarily amount to family violence, that “as a woman i would expect far more than that.” (h) her fundamental misconception of the operation of the interim orders of 9 november 2022 with respect to the allocation of sole parental responsibility and the notation providing clarity around the order including the father’s ability to select and enrol y at school. the mother was highly critical of the father for not consulting with her and first obtaining her agreement. (i) the persistent failure when in the care of the mother for y to communicate electronically with her father at the times provided for in the interim orders. (j) that the mother’s submissions were largely about denigrating the father and pursuing her allegations that his behaviour amounts to family violence by way of coercion and control.   that “i didn’t create the housing crisis in adelaide but i feel like i am being penalised.” (c) that she sought a further adjournment of these proceedings in order to present further evidence of the outcome, once it is known, of her application to the south australia civil and administrative tribunal to terminate the lease early in order to move into the property in adelaide that she owns. (d) that she questioned x in 2021 about her beliefs that the father was telling x that “mum is unwell” and her current and ongoing beliefs that the father is still telling x this. (e) that “i don’t have the energy and tenacity of the father, that doesn’t mean i should be punished and have the children taken away from me.” (f) that “i have a right to enjoy my children, just like any mother and any parent.” (g) in response to the icl’s position that the father’s communications are not aggressive or coercive and do not necessarily amount to family violence, that “as a woman i would expect far more than that.” (h) her fundamental misconception of the operation of the interim orders of 9 november 2022 with respect to the allocation of sole parental responsibility and the notation providing clarity around the order including the father’s ability to select and enrol y at school. the mother was highly critical of the father for not consulting with her and first obtaining her agreement. (i) the persistent failure when in the care of the mother for y to communicate electronically with her father at the times provided for in the interim orders. (j) that the mother’s submissions were largely about denigrating the father and pursuing her allegations that his behaviour amounts to family violence by way of coercion and control.   that she sought a further adjournment of these proceedings in order to present further evidence of the outcome, once it is known, of her application to the south australia civil and administrative tribunal to terminate the lease early in order to move into the property in adelaide that she owns. (d) that she questioned x in 2021 about her beliefs that the father was telling x that “mum is unwell” and her current and ongoing beliefs that the father is still telling x this. (e) that “i don’t have the energy and tenacity of the father, that doesn’t mean i should be punished and have the children taken away from me.” (f) that “i have a right to enjoy my children, just like any mother and any parent.” (g) in response to the icl’s position that the father’s communications are not aggressive or coercive and do not necessarily amount to family violence, that “as a woman i would expect far more than that.” (h) her fundamental misconception of the operation of the interim orders of 9 november 2022 with respect to the allocation of sole parental responsibility and the notation providing clarity around the order including the father’s ability to select and enrol y at school. the mother was highly critical of the father for not consulting with her and first obtaining her agreement. (i) the persistent failure when in the care of the mother for y to communicate electronically with her father at the times provided for in the interim orders. (j) that the mother’s submissions were largely about denigrating the father and pursuing her allegations that his behaviour amounts to family violence by way of coercion and control.   that she questioned x in 2021 about her beliefs that the father was telling x that “mum is unwell” and her current and ongoing beliefs that the father is still telling x this. (e) that “i don’t have the energy and tenacity of the father, that doesn’t mean i should be punished and have the children taken away from me.” (f) that “i have a right to enjoy my children, just like any mother and any parent.” (g) in response to the icl’s position that the father’s communications are not aggressive or coercive and do not necessarily amount to family violence, that “as a woman i would expect far more than that.” (h) her fundamental misconception of the operation of the interim orders of 9 november 2022 with respect to the allocation of sole parental responsibility and the notation providing clarity around the order including the father’s ability to select and enrol y at school. the mother was highly critical of the father for not consulting with her and first obtaining her agreement. (i) the persistent failure when in the care of the mother for y to communicate electronically with her father at the times provided for in the interim orders. (j) that the mother’s submissions were largely about denigrating the father and pursuing her allegations that his behaviour amounts to family violence by way of coercion and control.   that “i don’t have the energy and tenacity of the father, that doesn’t mean i should be punished and have the children taken away from me.” (f) that “i have a right to enjoy my children, just like any mother and any parent.” (g) in response to the icl’s position that the father’s communications are not aggressive or coercive and do not necessarily amount to family violence, that “as a woman i would expect far more than that.” (h) her fundamental misconception of the operation of the interim orders of 9 november 2022 with respect to the allocation of sole parental responsibility and the notation providing clarity around the order including the father’s ability to select and enrol y at school. the mother was highly critical of the father for not consulting with her and first obtaining her agreement. (i) the persistent failure when in the care of the mother for y to communicate electronically with her father at the times provided for in the interim orders. (j) that the mother’s submissions were largely about denigrating the father and pursuing her allegations that his behaviour amounts to family violence by way of coercion and control.   that “i have a right to enjoy my children, just like any mother and any parent.” (g) in response to the icl’s position that the father’s communications are not aggressive or coercive and do not necessarily amount to family violence, that “as a woman i would expect far more than that.” (h) her fundamental misconception of the operation of the interim orders of 9 november 2022 with respect to the allocation of sole parental responsibility and the notation providing clarity around the order including the father’s ability to select and enrol y at school. the mother was highly critical of the father for not consulting with her and first obtaining her agreement. (i) the persistent failure when in the care of the mother for y to communicate electronically with her father at the times provided for in the interim orders. (j) that the mother’s submissions were largely about denigrating the father and pursuing her allegations that his behaviour amounts to family violence by way of coercion and control.   in response to the icl’s position that the father’s communications are not aggressive or coercive and do not necessarily amount to family violence, that “as a woman i would expect far more than that.” (h) her fundamental misconception of the operation of the interim orders of 9 november 2022 with respect to the allocation of sole parental responsibility and the notation providing clarity around the order including the father’s ability to select and enrol y at school. the mother was highly critical of the father for not consulting with her and first obtaining her agreement. (i) the persistent failure when in the care of the mother for y to communicate electronically with her father at the times provided for in the interim orders. (j) that the mother’s submissions were largely about denigrating the father and pursuing her allegations that his behaviour amounts to family violence by way of coercion and control.   her fundamental misconception of the operation of the interim orders of 9 november 2022 with respect to the allocation of sole parental responsibility and the notation providing clarity around the order including the father’s ability to select and enrol y at school. the mother was highly critical of the father for not consulting with her and first obtaining her agreement. (i) the persistent failure when in the care of the mother for y to communicate electronically with her father at the times provided for in the interim orders. (j) that the mother’s submissions were largely about denigrating the father and pursuing her allegations that his behaviour amounts to family violence by way of coercion and control.   the persistent failure when in the care of the mother for y to communicate electronically with her father at the times provided for in the interim orders. (j) that the mother’s submissions were largely about denigrating the father and pursuing her allegations that his behaviour amounts to family violence by way of coercion and control.   that the mother’s submissions were largely about denigrating the father and pursuing her allegations that his behaviour amounts to family violence by way of coercion and control.   that she considered the father denying her request for him to contribute to the costs of her relocation to adelaide as a further example of his coercion and control towards her. (b) that she “would like to enter a co-parenting face to face workshop” but says to the sacat as recently as 2 march 2023 that “i wish to leave my abuser behind me and have very little to do with him as possible.” (c) that she “is a great believer in communication” and “really wants to co-parent” and identified the j organisation as being a useful resource to assist the parents but has not complied with the orders that she consented to and attend and participate in the courses offered by that same institute. (d) that she relies on aspects of dr f’s report she deems as favourable but also submits that “it was proven in court that [dr f] is known to misconstrue words” in relation to aspects of the report that are unfavourable to her.   that she “would like to enter a co-parenting face to face workshop” but says to the sacat as recently as 2 march 2023 that “i wish to leave my abuser behind me and have very little to do with him as possible.” (c) that she “is a great believer in communication” and “really wants to co-parent” and identified the j organisation as being a useful resource to assist the parents but has not complied with the orders that she consented to and attend and participate in the courses offered by that same institute. (d) that she relies on aspects of dr f’s report she deems as favourable but also submits that “it was proven in court that [dr f] is known to misconstrue words” in relation to aspects of the report that are unfavourable to her.   that she “is a great believer in communication” and “really wants to co-parent” and identified the j organisation as being a useful resource to assist the parents but has not complied with the orders that she consented to and attend and participate in the courses offered by that same institute. (d) that she relies on aspects of dr f’s report she deems as favourable but also submits that “it was proven in court that [dr f] is known to misconstrue words” in relation to aspects of the report that are unfavourable to her.   that she relies on aspects of dr f’s report she deems as favourable but also submits that “it was proven in court that [dr f] is known to misconstrue words” in relation to aspects of the report that are unfavourable to her.
determination of changeover location
determination of extent of supervision order & restraints
other orders
associate: dated: 16 march 2023
dated: 16 march 2023
[1] (see summitt & summitt and ors (re-opening) [2009] famca 365 where murphy j referred to the decision of applegarth j in eb v ct (no .2) [2008] qsc 306).