last updated: 10 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
cane & kemble [2023] fedcfamc2f 290
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge jenkins
introduction
background
the evidence
the parties
mr cane’s witnesses
mr r
mr s
dr v
mr w
ms p
ms kemble’s witnesses
ms e
mr d
mr o
mr x
ms y
mr z
ms ab
ms ac
dr ad
ms ae
ms af
ms ag
the law
de facto relationships meaning of de facto relationship   a person is in a de facto relationship with another person if:  the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis. (emphasis added)  having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.
the high court held:  : “the act contains no exhaustive definition of the term ‘breakdown’, save that s 4 of the act relevantly provides that in relation to a de facto relationship, it ‘does not include a breakdown of the relationship by reason of death’ ... ... [21]...the primary judge found that the respondent’s conduct during the demise of the appellant’s mental capacity was inconsistent with a ‘fundamental premise’ of their relationship, namely the strict separation of their assets. that inconsistent conduct, all of which occurred while the appellant was ‘labouring under an incapacity’, comprised: the entry into a new enduring power of attorney that ‘favoured [the respondent’s] rights over hers’, the respondent instructing solicitors to prepare an updated will ‘on terms vastly more favourable to him’, the respondent’s ‘unwillingness to cooperate’ with the appellant’s children in the administration of her affairs, the respondent’s ‘persistent’ refusal to permit the trustee to sell the home ... while ‘neglecting to pay any of the [appellant’s] care costs’, thus depleting her estate, the respondent’s proposal that the appellant’s ‘super be used in the first instance to meet her costs’, and then his subsequent proposal that ‘he pay the ... fees in the first instance and be reimbursed by the [appellant’s] estate’, and the respondent’s ‘ongoing and deliberate frustration’ of the trustee’s lawful administration of the appellant’s financial affairs. the primary judge found that this conduct was ‘unequivocally indicative of and consistent only with ... the cessation of the de facto relationship as it previously existed’. ( ... ) ... [23]...the full court reviewed the conduct identified by the primary judge. none of the conduct was found to be fundamentally inconsistent with a continuing de facto relationship ... ”
the high court continued:  ] ... cohabitation of a residence or residences is not a necessary feature of ‘living together’. that phrase must be construed to take account of the many various ways in which two people may share their lives together in the modern world. two people, for any number of reasons, may not reside in the same residence, but nonetheless be in a de facto relationship in the sense required by s 4aa. [39] the language of s 4aa of the act and its reference to ‘living together’ requires no different approach to determining whether a relationship exists of the kind defined. ‘living together’ ... should be construed as meaning sharing life as a couple. section 4aa does not prescribe any way by which a couple may share life together. its language is sufficiently broad to accommodate the great variety of ways a de facto relationship may exist....
periods of cohabitation   at paragraph 25 of his trial affidavit he says the parties were separated for a period of 13 months between about january 2017 and february 2018, (b) at paragraph 55 (a)(iv) of his trial affidavit he says the second period of separation was from january 2017 for eight months, (c) in the witness box mr cane gave evidence that in mid-2017:   at paragraph 55 (a)(iv) of his trial affidavit he says the second period of separation was from january 2017 for eight months, (c) in the witness box mr cane gave evidence that in mid-2017:   in the witness box mr cane gave evidence that in mid-2017:
...she came to me, she says it's not working out with [mr o], he's not sleeping with her. he's not attracted to her, it's just not working out for her. she wants, you know, to try, you know - and then she just starts back with me in regards to dating and being together and staying the night with me, sleeping with me and that type of thing. that's my – that’s my definition of that. are - were we living together at the time? no. were we having sexual relations and having dinner every day together: yes...   in paragraph 61 of his trial affidavit he says they resumed their relationship in january 2018 but he retained his accommodation at suburb n (although his evidence was also that he did not move to suburb n until 2019), (e) at paragraph 55 (a)(v) of his trial affidavit he says between mid 2018 and late 2018 they lived as a family in suburb j, (f) in paragraph 115 of his trial affidavit he says in or about 2018 they resumed their relationship, (g) at paragraph 82 of his affidavit filed 31 january 2022 he says:   at paragraph 55 (a)(v) of his trial affidavit he says between mid 2018 and late 2018 they lived as a family in suburb j, (f) in paragraph 115 of his trial affidavit he says in or about 2018 they resumed their relationship, (g) at paragraph 82 of his affidavit filed 31 january 2022 he says:   in paragraph 115 of his trial affidavit he says in or about 2018 they resumed their relationship, (g) at paragraph 82 of his affidavit filed 31 january 2022 he says:   at paragraph 82 of his affidavit filed 31 january 2022 he says:
in about 2018 [ms kemble] and i resumed our relationship, however, i decided i could not live with [ms kemble]...   mr cane said in the witness box that he moved to suburb j in the middle of 2018 and remained there until late 2018.
degree of financial dependence or inter-dependence/mutual property
public aspects of the relationship   they were received by viber and whatsapp and she was unable to subpoena them, (b) she could not produce screenshots of the demands because her phone had been run over three or four months before the trial, (c) the screenshots were not in the affidavit because her solicitor may have taken them out, (d) no messages were saved on icloud although some photos had come back with “weird dates”.   she could not produce screenshots of the demands because her phone had been run over three or four months before the trial, (c) the screenshots were not in the affidavit because her solicitor may have taken them out, (d) no messages were saved on icloud although some photos had come back with “weird dates”.   the screenshots were not in the affidavit because her solicitor may have taken them out, (d) no messages were saved on icloud although some photos had come back with “weird dates”.   no messages were saved on icloud although some photos had come back with “weird dates”.
whether a sexual relationship existed
mutual commitment to a shared life   in 2018 she transferred the company aj into the trustee for company aj trust, without his knowledge, (b) in 2018 she registered the trustee for company ak job search engine and transferred the company ak recruitment search engine into the trust without his knowledge, and (c) in 2019 she transferred the company al into the trustee for the company al unit trust without his knowledge.   in 2018 she registered the trustee for company ak job search engine and transferred the company ak recruitment search engine into the trust without his knowledge, and (c) in 2019 she transferred the company al into the trustee for the company al unit trust without his knowledge.   in 2019 she transferred the company al into the trustee for the company al unit trust without his knowledge.
analysis
leave out of time
the law
...the general principle is that on the issue of the establishment of a prima facie case the court proceeds on the basis that the evidence of the applicant, unless it is inherently unbelievable or contradictory, should be accepted, and the court should therefore decide whether or not on that basis a prima facie case has been made out. if leave is granted, then it is for the court conducting the ultimate hearing to determine whether that prima facie case can be established.
hardship and the question of a reasonable claim
what is mr cane’s claim?
exercise of the discretion
associate: dated: 17 march 2023
dated: 17 march 2023