last updated: 10 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ridgeway & eastman [2023] fedcfamc2f 300
orders
the court orders that:  the child’s education, (b) the child’s religious and cultural up bringing, and (c) the child’s health.   the child’s religious and cultural up bringing, and (c) the child’s health.   the child’s health.
time spent  with the father for the first half in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years, and (b) with the mother for the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years with changeovers to occur at 10:00am on the saturday and return changeover to occur at 3:00pm on the sunday.   with the mother for the first half in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years with changeovers to occur at 10:00am on the saturday and return changeover to occur at 3:00pm on the sunday.   from 5.00pm christmas eve until 12.00noon christmas day in odd number years, (b) from 12.00 christmas day until 5.00pm boxing day in even number years, (c) on x’s birthday as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, if his birthday is on a school day then from that following saturday 10am to 3pm. (d) on the mother’s birthday, if it is a school day from after school saturday 10am to 3pm. (e) on y’s birthday from the weekend thereafter saturday 10am until 3pm. (f) on z’s birthday from the weekend thereafter saturday 10am until 3 pm. (g) on w’s birthday from saturday 10am to 3pm. (h) on mother’s day from 5.00 pm the day before until 3pm on mother’s day (i) with the father on father’s day commencing 5:30pm on the friday prior and concluding at 5:30pm on sunday father’s day.   from 12.00 christmas day until 5.00pm boxing day in even number years, (c) on x’s birthday as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, if his birthday is on a school day then from that following saturday 10am to 3pm. (d) on the mother’s birthday, if it is a school day from after school saturday 10am to 3pm. (e) on y’s birthday from the weekend thereafter saturday 10am until 3pm. (f) on z’s birthday from the weekend thereafter saturday 10am until 3 pm. (g) on w’s birthday from saturday 10am to 3pm. (h) on mother’s day from 5.00 pm the day before until 3pm on mother’s day (i) with the father on father’s day commencing 5:30pm on the friday prior and concluding at 5:30pm on sunday father’s day.   on x’s birthday as agreed between the parties in writing and failing agreement, if his birthday is on a school day then from that following saturday 10am to 3pm. (d) on the mother’s birthday, if it is a school day from after school saturday 10am to 3pm. (e) on y’s birthday from the weekend thereafter saturday 10am until 3pm. (f) on z’s birthday from the weekend thereafter saturday 10am until 3 pm. (g) on w’s birthday from saturday 10am to 3pm. (h) on mother’s day from 5.00 pm the day before until 3pm on mother’s day (i) with the father on father’s day commencing 5:30pm on the friday prior and concluding at 5:30pm on sunday father’s day.   on the mother’s birthday, if it is a school day from after school saturday 10am to 3pm. (e) on y’s birthday from the weekend thereafter saturday 10am until 3pm. (f) on z’s birthday from the weekend thereafter saturday 10am until 3 pm. (g) on w’s birthday from saturday 10am to 3pm. (h) on mother’s day from 5.00 pm the day before until 3pm on mother’s day (i) with the father on father’s day commencing 5:30pm on the friday prior and concluding at 5:30pm on sunday father’s day.   on y’s birthday from the weekend thereafter saturday 10am until 3pm. (f) on z’s birthday from the weekend thereafter saturday 10am until 3 pm. (g) on w’s birthday from saturday 10am to 3pm. (h) on mother’s day from 5.00 pm the day before until 3pm on mother’s day (i) with the father on father’s day commencing 5:30pm on the friday prior and concluding at 5:30pm on sunday father’s day.   on z’s birthday from the weekend thereafter saturday 10am until 3 pm. (g) on w’s birthday from saturday 10am to 3pm. (h) on mother’s day from 5.00 pm the day before until 3pm on mother’s day (i) with the father on father’s day commencing 5:30pm on the friday prior and concluding at 5:30pm on sunday father’s day.   on w’s birthday from saturday 10am to 3pm. (h) on mother’s day from 5.00 pm the day before until 3pm on mother’s day (i) with the father on father’s day commencing 5:30pm on the friday prior and concluding at 5:30pm on sunday father’s day.   on mother’s day from 5.00 pm the day before until 3pm on mother’s day (i) with the father on father’s day commencing 5:30pm on the friday prior and concluding at 5:30pm on sunday father’s day.   with the father on father’s day commencing 5:30pm on the friday prior and concluding at 5:30pm on sunday father’s day.
changeovers
communication  the call shall occur by facetime / whatsapp / messenger or any other electronic medium as agreed between the parties, and (b) the mother shall instigate the call to the child’s mobile phone, and (c) the father shall answer the call (and return to call if missed) and provide the child privacy during the call.   the mother shall instigate the call to the child’s mobile phone, and (c) the father shall answer the call (and return to call if missed) and provide the child privacy during the call.   the father shall answer the call (and return to call if missed) and provide the child privacy during the call.   communicate by text or email except in the event of an emergency when communication will be by telephone, (b) ensure all communication between them is limited to discussing care arrangements or welfare of the children, (c) ensure communication remains polite and respectful.   ensure all communication between them is limited to discussing care arrangements or welfare of the children, (c) ensure communication remains polite and respectful.   ensure communication remains polite and respectful.   copy of school reports, school newsletters, school photo application forms, parent/teacher interview notices and so forth regarding the educational needs of the children, (b) copy of medical reports including any referrals, information regarding any medical condition suffered by either of the child, including treatment and any other information or material concerning the health and wellbeing of the child.   copy of medical reports including any referrals, information regarding any medical condition suffered by either of the child, including treatment and any other information or material concerning the health and wellbeing of the child.
injunctions  exposing the child to any excessive alcohol or any illicit substance use by either of the parties, (b) permitting the child to spend time with or in any way be present near or have any form of contact with mr d and in the event that communication between the child and mr d is likely to occur, the child shall immediately be returned to the father, (c) that both parents refrain from consuming alcohol to excess or any illicit substances whilst the child is spending time with either of the parties, (d) that each parent be restrained from denigrating the other parent or the parent’s partner or members of that parent’s family in the presence of or within the hearing of the child and each parent remove the child from the hearing of anyone else who may be denigrating the other parent or that parent’s partner or family, (e) removed the child from school unless he is unwell, (f) from discussing the court proceedings with the child or allowing the child to read or view any court documents, (g) from physically disciplining or restraining the child or permitting a third party to do so, (h) from exposing the child to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parents will take all measures necessary to remove the child from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise, (i) from posting to any social media account negative or derogatory comments including photos or information in relation the child and/or the parents or these proceedings, and (j) from using the child as a conduit to pass messages to the other parent,   permitting the child to spend time with or in any way be present near or have any form of contact with mr d and in the event that communication between the child and mr d is likely to occur, the child shall immediately be returned to the father, (c) that both parents refrain from consuming alcohol to excess or any illicit substances whilst the child is spending time with either of the parties, (d) that each parent be restrained from denigrating the other parent or the parent’s partner or members of that parent’s family in the presence of or within the hearing of the child and each parent remove the child from the hearing of anyone else who may be denigrating the other parent or that parent’s partner or family, (e) removed the child from school unless he is unwell, (f) from discussing the court proceedings with the child or allowing the child to read or view any court documents, (g) from physically disciplining or restraining the child or permitting a third party to do so, (h) from exposing the child to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parents will take all measures necessary to remove the child from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise, (i) from posting to any social media account negative or derogatory comments including photos or information in relation the child and/or the parents or these proceedings, and (j) from using the child as a conduit to pass messages to the other parent,   that both parents refrain from consuming alcohol to excess or any illicit substances whilst the child is spending time with either of the parties, (d) that each parent be restrained from denigrating the other parent or the parent’s partner or members of that parent’s family in the presence of or within the hearing of the child and each parent remove the child from the hearing of anyone else who may be denigrating the other parent or that parent’s partner or family, (e) removed the child from school unless he is unwell, (f) from discussing the court proceedings with the child or allowing the child to read or view any court documents, (g) from physically disciplining or restraining the child or permitting a third party to do so, (h) from exposing the child to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parents will take all measures necessary to remove the child from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise, (i) from posting to any social media account negative or derogatory comments including photos or information in relation the child and/or the parents or these proceedings, and (j) from using the child as a conduit to pass messages to the other parent,   that each parent be restrained from denigrating the other parent or the parent’s partner or members of that parent’s family in the presence of or within the hearing of the child and each parent remove the child from the hearing of anyone else who may be denigrating the other parent or that parent’s partner or family, (e) removed the child from school unless he is unwell, (f) from discussing the court proceedings with the child or allowing the child to read or view any court documents, (g) from physically disciplining or restraining the child or permitting a third party to do so, (h) from exposing the child to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parents will take all measures necessary to remove the child from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise, (i) from posting to any social media account negative or derogatory comments including photos or information in relation the child and/or the parents or these proceedings, and (j) from using the child as a conduit to pass messages to the other parent,   removed the child from school unless he is unwell, (f) from discussing the court proceedings with the child or allowing the child to read or view any court documents, (g) from physically disciplining or restraining the child or permitting a third party to do so, (h) from exposing the child to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parents will take all measures necessary to remove the child from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise, (i) from posting to any social media account negative or derogatory comments including photos or information in relation the child and/or the parents or these proceedings, and (j) from using the child as a conduit to pass messages to the other parent,   from discussing the court proceedings with the child or allowing the child to read or view any court documents, (g) from physically disciplining or restraining the child or permitting a third party to do so, (h) from exposing the child to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parents will take all measures necessary to remove the child from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise, (i) from posting to any social media account negative or derogatory comments including photos or information in relation the child and/or the parents or these proceedings, and (j) from using the child as a conduit to pass messages to the other parent,   from physically disciplining or restraining the child or permitting a third party to do so, (h) from exposing the child to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parents will take all measures necessary to remove the child from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise, (i) from posting to any social media account negative or derogatory comments including photos or information in relation the child and/or the parents or these proceedings, and (j) from using the child as a conduit to pass messages to the other parent,   from exposing the child to abuse (including verbal abuse) or family violence and that the parents will take all measures necessary to remove the child from any act of family violence should such circumstances arise, (i) from posting to any social media account negative or derogatory comments including photos or information in relation the child and/or the parents or these proceedings, and (j) from using the child as a conduit to pass messages to the other parent,   from posting to any social media account negative or derogatory comments including photos or information in relation the child and/or the parents or these proceedings, and (j) from using the child as a conduit to pass messages to the other parent,   from using the child as a conduit to pass messages to the other parent,
procedural orders
reasons for judgmentex tempore
judge young
associate: dated: 20 march 2023
dated: 20 march 2023