last updated: 10 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
hines & easton [2023] fedcfamc2f 311
orders
the court orders that:  the documents mentioned in rule 6.06 of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth). (b) statements for all bank or credit union accounts (including loan, mortgage and credit card accounts) in which the party has an interest for the period from 12 months before the date of separation to the date of these orders, (c) any documents which: (i) support the information contained in the party’s financial statement / financial summary, (ii) estimate the value of any vehicle in the party’s possession, (iii) confirm the date of receipt and amount of any inheritance, gift, redundancy or compensation payment received by the party from the date of cohabitation to the date of these orders, (iv) detail the party’s acquisition or disposal of property for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, (v) evidence any increase or reduction in the liabilities of the party for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, and (vi) confirm the value of any superannuation fund in which the party has an interest at the date of cohabitation, the date of separation and the date of these orders.   statements for all bank or credit union accounts (including loan, mortgage and credit card accounts) in which the party has an interest for the period from 12 months before the date of separation to the date of these orders, (c) any documents which: (i) support the information contained in the party’s financial statement / financial summary, (ii) estimate the value of any vehicle in the party’s possession, (iii) confirm the date of receipt and amount of any inheritance, gift, redundancy or compensation payment received by the party from the date of cohabitation to the date of these orders, (iv) detail the party’s acquisition or disposal of property for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, (v) evidence any increase or reduction in the liabilities of the party for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, and (vi) confirm the value of any superannuation fund in which the party has an interest at the date of cohabitation, the date of separation and the date of these orders.   any documents which: (i) support the information contained in the party’s financial statement / financial summary, (ii) estimate the value of any vehicle in the party’s possession, (iii) confirm the date of receipt and amount of any inheritance, gift, redundancy or compensation payment received by the party from the date of cohabitation to the date of these orders, (iv) detail the party’s acquisition or disposal of property for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, (v) evidence any increase or reduction in the liabilities of the party for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, and (vi) confirm the value of any superannuation fund in which the party has an interest at the date of cohabitation, the date of separation and the date of these orders.   support the information contained in the party’s financial statement / financial summary, (ii) estimate the value of any vehicle in the party’s possession, (iii) confirm the date of receipt and amount of any inheritance, gift, redundancy or compensation payment received by the party from the date of cohabitation to the date of these orders, (iv) detail the party’s acquisition or disposal of property for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, (v) evidence any increase or reduction in the liabilities of the party for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, and (vi) confirm the value of any superannuation fund in which the party has an interest at the date of cohabitation, the date of separation and the date of these orders.  ) estimate the value of any vehicle in the party’s possession, (iii) confirm the date of receipt and amount of any inheritance, gift, redundancy or compensation payment received by the party from the date of cohabitation to the date of these orders, (iv) detail the party’s acquisition or disposal of property for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, (v) evidence any increase or reduction in the liabilities of the party for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, and (vi) confirm the value of any superannuation fund in which the party has an interest at the date of cohabitation, the date of separation and the date of these orders.  i) confirm the date of receipt and amount of any inheritance, gift, redundancy or compensation payment received by the party from the date of cohabitation to the date of these orders, (iv) detail the party’s acquisition or disposal of property for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, (v) evidence any increase or reduction in the liabilities of the party for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, and (vi) confirm the value of any superannuation fund in which the party has an interest at the date of cohabitation, the date of separation and the date of these orders.  ) detail the party’s acquisition or disposal of property for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, (v) evidence any increase or reduction in the liabilities of the party for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, and (vi) confirm the value of any superannuation fund in which the party has an interest at the date of cohabitation, the date of separation and the date of these orders.   evidence any increase or reduction in the liabilities of the party for the period from 12 months prior to the date of separation to the date of these orders, and (vi) confirm the value of any superannuation fund in which the party has an interest at the date of cohabitation, the date of separation and the date of these orders.  ) confirm the value of any superannuation fund in which the party has an interest at the date of cohabitation, the date of separation and the date of these orders.
reasons for judgment
judge brown:
introduction
on 14 may 2020 i left our family home situated at [b street, suburb c] at the request of the respondent. she told me that she needed some time apart if our relationship was going to survive. i thought i would be gone for 3 to 4 weeks. i was never under the impression that we had separated on a final basis. i tried to communicate with the respondent, asking her when i could come home. she would always tell me that she needed more time. the respondent never communicated to me that our relationship was officially over. i was left to read between the lines when the respondent refused to return my calls or speak about our relationship. i made offers to try to reconcile with the respondent. i proposed that we start to date again and take things slowly. she did not agree. it was not until this year in about june 2022 that i accepted that the respondent and i were not going to reconcile. i was holding onto hope that we would be able to make it work. i have been attempting to resolve our outstanding property settlement matters since this time. i obtained legal advice from the legal services commission in or about june/ july 2022. i was advised that i was out of time to apply for a property settlement.[5]   hines] deliberately contributor nothing to the mortgage repayments, loan repayments for the solar system, council rates, house insurance premiums and costs for the maintenance of the house, as a means to exert financial hardship on me. this was done in order to achieve his goal of forcing me back into a relationship through his financial pressure. these are the types of liabilities that a potential interested party should have been contributing to, in order to protect that interest after the breakdown of a relationship, especially if that party wished to re-establish that relationship, not through coercion, but through compassion and empathy.[6]
background
applicable legal provisions
...the application is made within the period (the standard application period) of...2 years after the end of the de facto relationship.
however, pursuant to section 44(6):   the court may grant the party leave to apply after the end of the standard application period if the court is satisfied that: (a) hardship would be caused to the party or a child if leave were not granted, or (b) in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party—the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   hardship would be caused to the party or a child if leave were not granted, or (b) in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party—the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   in the case of an application for an order for the maintenance of the party—the party’s circumstances were, at the end of the standard application period, such that he or she would have been unable to support himself or herself without an income tested pension, allowance or benefit.   a person is in a de facto relationship with another person if: (a) the persons are not legally married to each other, and (b) the persons are not related by family (see subsection (6)), and (c) having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   having regard to all the circumstances of their relationship, they have a relationship as a couple living together on a genuine domestic basis.   the duration of the relationship, (b) the nature and extent of their common residence, (c) whether a sexual relationship exists, (d) the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them, (e) the ownership, use and acquisition of their property, (f) the degree of mutual commitment to a shared life, (g) whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship, (h) the care and support of children, (i) the reputation and public aspects of the relationship.   the degree of financial dependence or interdependence, and any arrangements for financial support, between them,   whether the relationship is or was registered under a prescribed law of a state or territory as a prescribed kind of relationship,
the expression ‘just and equitable’ is a qualitative description of a conclusion reached after examination of a range of potentially competing considerations. it does not admit of exhaustive definition. it is not possible to chart its metes and bounds.[11]
issues relating to time limits
marriage involves many elements, some or all of which may be present in a particular marriage – elements such as dwelling under the same roof, sexual intercourse, mutual society and protection, recognition of the existence of the marriage by both spouses in public and private relationships and the nurture and support of the children of the marriage. when it is asserted that a separation has taken place it may be necessary to examine and contrast the state of the marital relationship before and after the alleged separation. whether there has been a separation will be a question of fact to be determined in each case.
the discretion to extend time must be exercised in the context of the rationales for the existence of limitation periods. for nearly 400 years, the policy of the law has been to fix definite time limits (usually six but often three years) for prosecuting civil claims. the enactment of time limitations has been driven by the general perception that ‘[w]here there is delay the whole quality of justice deteriorates’.[16]
a limitation period should not be seen therefore as an arbitrary cut off point unrelated to the demands of justice or the general welfare of society. it represents the legislature’s judgment that the welfare of society is best served by causes of action being litigated within the limitation period, notwithstanding that the enactment of that period may often result in a good cause of action being defeated. ... a limitation provision is the general rule, an extension provision is the exception to it. the extension provision is a legislative recognition that general conceptions of what justice requires in particular categories of cases may sometimes be overridden by the facts of an individual case.[17]
the discretion ... is to order an extension of the limitation period. it is a discretion to grant, not a discretion to refuse, and on well established principles an applicant must satisfy the court that grounds exist for exercising the discretion in his or her favour. there is an evidentiary onus on the prospective defendant to raise any consideration telling against the exercise of the discretion. but the ultimate onus of satisfying the court that time should be extended remains on the applicant.
the applicant must establish three principal matters: first, a reasonable prima facie case for relief, had she instituted proceedings in time, secondly, that denial of the wife’s claim would cause her hardship, and thirdly, an adequate explanation as to her delay. ... if those three elements are satisfied, the court should further, in determining whether to exercise its discretion to grant relief, consider the question of prejudice which the respondent would suffer by reason of the delay in bringing the application.
... the general principle is that on the issue of the establishment of a prima facie case the court proceeds on the basis that the evidence of the applicant, unless it is inherently unbelievable or contradictory, should be accepted, and the court should therefore decide whether or not on that basis a prima facie case has been made out. if leave is granted, then it is for the court conducting the ultimate hearing to determine whether the prima facie case can be established.
these varying phrases may tend to suggest different shades of meaning whereas in reality they are directed to the same fundamental enquiry which basically is in the context whether on the applicant’s material he or she has a reasonable claim to be heard by the court.  he well-established test is that the applicant must have a prima facie claim worth pursuing or a ‘real’ probability of success. further, leave will not be granted if to do so would not, in the substantive result, alleviate that hardship.[24]
... a consideration, but not a final determination, of the nature of the applicant’s claim. in doing so, the court must weigh the applicant’s case against that of the respondent’s and form a view as to whether there is in fact a prima facie case, or a real probability of success, that would, if leave were granted, alleviate hardship.
...the starting point in determining an application for leave is to consider the question of hardship which requires for its existence a conclusion that an applicant has a prima facie or arguable case of substance having regard to all of the circumstances of the case. that must take into account the costs or likely costs to be incurred in pursuing the claim. ... an analysis of the potential claim of the de facto wife was necessary to determine whether or not hardship would be occasioned to the de facto wife if she were not granted leave to pursue that claim. further, as the authorities to which reference has been made demonstrate, an essential element is to consider the prospective legal costs of pursuing the identified or identifiable claim. obviously, the prospective costs may render the conclusion that no hardship would be occasioned to an applicant to pursue an uncommercial claim.
in appropriate cases the interests of justice might overcome long delay and on occasions an inadequate explanation for the delay, which is only one factor to be considered in determining an application for leave pursuant to s 44(3) of the act.[28]
discussion
associate: dated: 23 march 2023
dated: 23 march 2023
[1] hereinafter referred to as ‘the act’.[2] see family law act 1975 (cth) at s 48(1). [3] see family law act 1975 (cth) at s 48(2).[4] see family law act 1975 (cth) at s 55.[5] see affidavit of mr hines filed 23 november 2022 at [7]-[10].[6] see affidavit of ms easton filed 21 december 2022 at [17]-[18].[7] see annexure -4 to affidavit of mr hines filed 23 november 2022. [8] see hickey & hickey & attorney-general (intervener) [2003] famca 395; (2003) flc 93-143 at 78,386 [39] and bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116 at [60].[9] see family law act (cth) s 90sm(4)(c).[10] see waters & jurek [1995] famca 101; (1995) flc 92-635.[11] stanford v stanford (2012) 247 clr 108, 120 [36] (french cj, hayne, kiefel and bell jj).[12] see falk v falk (1977) flc 90-247 at 76,333.[13] pavey v pavey [1976] famca 36; (1976) flc 90-051.[14] batty v batty [1986] famca 33; (1986) flc 91-703 at 75,087.[15] brisbane south regional health authority v taylor [1996] hca 25; [1996] 186 clr 541 at 551.[16] brisbane south regional health authority v taylor [1996] hca 25; [1996] 186 clr 541 at 553.[17] brisbane south regional health authority v taylor [1996] hca 25; [1996] 186 clr 541 at 547.[18] see milas v gm holden limited [2015] fcca 1311 per judge o’sullivan.[19] see whitford & whitford [1979] famca 3; (1979) flc 90-612 at 78,146.[20] whitford & whitford [1979] famca 3; (1979) flc 90-612 at 78,146.[21] see jacenko & jacenko [1986] famca 25; (1986) flc 91-776 at page 75,644.[22] see hall, k a and hall, j c [1979] famca 50; (1979) flc 90-679.[23] see sharp & sharp [2011] famcafc 150. [24] sharp & sharp [2011] famcafc 150 at [18].[25] edmunds & edmunds [2018] famcafc 121 at [48].[26] gadzen & simkin [2018] famcafc 218 at [37] – [42].[27] slocomb & hedgewood [2015] famcafc 219; (2015) flc 93-678.[28] slocomb & hedgewood [2015] famcafc 219; (2015) flc 93-678 at 80,548 [43].