last updated: 31 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gipps & ning [2023] fedcfamc2f 325
orders
the court orders that:  $182,359 by way of property settlement, (b) $2,987 for costs ordered on 21 may 2020, and (c) $4,000 for costs ordered on 17 may 2022.   $2,987 for costs ordered on 21 may 2020, and (c) $4,000 for costs ordered on 17 may 2022.   $4,000 for costs ordered on 17 may 2022.   the husband shall pay interest in accordance with rule 10.17 of the federal circuit and family court of australia rules 2021 on any outstanding amount, such interest to be calculated from the due date until the date of full payment. (b) within 6 weeks of the due date, the parties shall each do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to sell the property situated at b street, suburb c in the australian capital territory being the land more particularly described as section ... block ... on deposited plan ... (“the property”) and for this purpose: (i) the husband and wife are hereby appointed joint trustees for the sale of the property, (ii) the parties shall agree upon a selling agent (“the agent”) and a conveyancing solicitor (“the conveyancer”) but, failing agreement within 14 days of the due date, the agent and conveyancer shall be as nominated by the wife, (iii) the property shall be listed for sale by private treaty or auction by agreement between the parties in writing and, failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (iv) the listing or reserve price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement within 21 days of the due date, the listing or reserve price shall be as nominated by the agent, (v) the sale price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the property that is at least 90 per cent of the listing or reserve price, or as recommended by the agent, (vi) the husband shall co-operate in every way with the wife and the agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale, including making the keys readily available and allowing inspection of the property at all reasonable times, and (vii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the conveyancer and promptly execute the contract for sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   within 6 weeks of the due date, the parties shall each do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to sell the property situated at b street, suburb c in the australian capital territory being the land more particularly described as section ... block ... on deposited plan ... (“the property”) and for this purpose: (i) the husband and wife are hereby appointed joint trustees for the sale of the property, (ii) the parties shall agree upon a selling agent (“the agent”) and a conveyancing solicitor (“the conveyancer”) but, failing agreement within 14 days of the due date, the agent and conveyancer shall be as nominated by the wife, (iii) the property shall be listed for sale by private treaty or auction by agreement between the parties in writing and, failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (iv) the listing or reserve price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement within 21 days of the due date, the listing or reserve price shall be as nominated by the agent, (v) the sale price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the property that is at least 90 per cent of the listing or reserve price, or as recommended by the agent, (vi) the husband shall co-operate in every way with the wife and the agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale, including making the keys readily available and allowing inspection of the property at all reasonable times, and (vii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the conveyancer and promptly execute the contract for sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   the husband and wife are hereby appointed joint trustees for the sale of the property, (ii) the parties shall agree upon a selling agent (“the agent”) and a conveyancing solicitor (“the conveyancer”) but, failing agreement within 14 days of the due date, the agent and conveyancer shall be as nominated by the wife, (iii) the property shall be listed for sale by private treaty or auction by agreement between the parties in writing and, failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (iv) the listing or reserve price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement within 21 days of the due date, the listing or reserve price shall be as nominated by the agent, (v) the sale price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the property that is at least 90 per cent of the listing or reserve price, or as recommended by the agent, (vi) the husband shall co-operate in every way with the wife and the agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale, including making the keys readily available and allowing inspection of the property at all reasonable times, and (vii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the conveyancer and promptly execute the contract for sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale.  ) the parties shall agree upon a selling agent (“the agent”) and a conveyancing solicitor (“the conveyancer”) but, failing agreement within 14 days of the due date, the agent and conveyancer shall be as nominated by the wife, (iii) the property shall be listed for sale by private treaty or auction by agreement between the parties in writing and, failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (iv) the listing or reserve price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement within 21 days of the due date, the listing or reserve price shall be as nominated by the agent, (v) the sale price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the property that is at least 90 per cent of the listing or reserve price, or as recommended by the agent, (vi) the husband shall co-operate in every way with the wife and the agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale, including making the keys readily available and allowing inspection of the property at all reasonable times, and (vii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the conveyancer and promptly execute the contract for sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale.  i) the property shall be listed for sale by private treaty or auction by agreement between the parties in writing and, failing agreement, as recommended by the agent, (iv) the listing or reserve price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement within 21 days of the due date, the listing or reserve price shall be as nominated by the agent, (v) the sale price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the property that is at least 90 per cent of the listing or reserve price, or as recommended by the agent, (vi) the husband shall co-operate in every way with the wife and the agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale, including making the keys readily available and allowing inspection of the property at all reasonable times, and (vii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the conveyancer and promptly execute the contract for sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale.  ) the listing or reserve price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement within 21 days of the due date, the listing or reserve price shall be as nominated by the agent, (v) the sale price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the property that is at least 90 per cent of the listing or reserve price, or as recommended by the agent, (vi) the husband shall co-operate in every way with the wife and the agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale, including making the keys readily available and allowing inspection of the property at all reasonable times, and (vii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the conveyancer and promptly execute the contract for sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   the sale price for the property shall be as agreed between the parties and, failing agreement, the parties shall accept any offer to purchase the property that is at least 90 per cent of the listing or reserve price, or as recommended by the agent, (vi) the husband shall co-operate in every way with the wife and the agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale, including making the keys readily available and allowing inspection of the property at all reasonable times, and (vii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the conveyancer and promptly execute the contract for sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale.  ) the husband shall co-operate in every way with the wife and the agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale, including making the keys readily available and allowing inspection of the property at all reasonable times, and (vii) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the conveyancer and promptly execute the contract for sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale.  i) the parties shall co-operate in every way with the conveyancer and promptly execute the contract for sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale.   to discharge the mortgage to westpac banking corporation secured on the title of the property (dealing number: ...), (b) to pay any commission, conveyancing fees and other costs of sale, (c) to reimburse to either party any monies paid by prior written agreement in association with the preparation of the property for sale, (d) to pay to the wife any amount outstanding on the payment in order 1 above, plus interest in accordance with order 3(a) above, and (e) the balance to the husband.   to pay any commission, conveyancing fees and other costs of sale, (c) to reimburse to either party any monies paid by prior written agreement in association with the preparation of the property for sale, (d) to pay to the wife any amount outstanding on the payment in order 1 above, plus interest in accordance with order 3(a) above, and (e) the balance to the husband.   to reimburse to either party any monies paid by prior written agreement in association with the preparation of the property for sale, (d) to pay to the wife any amount outstanding on the payment in order 1 above, plus interest in accordance with order 3(a) above, and (e) the balance to the husband.   to pay to the wife any amount outstanding on the payment in order 1 above, plus interest in accordance with order 3(a) above, and (e) the balance to the husband.   the balance to the husband.   further encumbering the property without the consent in writing of the wife, and (b) selling or entering into any exclusive agency agreement in respect of the sale of the property.   selling or entering into any exclusive agency agreement in respect of the sale of the property.   each party is declared to be the sole legal, equitable and beneficial owner, to the exclusion of the other, to all assets, financial resources, superannuation, property and chattels in their name or possession at the date of these orders, and (b) each party shall indemnify the other and keep the other indemnified in relation to any liabilities associated with the property taken by them.   each party shall indemnify the other and keep the other indemnified in relation to any liabilities associated with the property taken by them.
reasons for judgment
judge hughes:
introduction
background
financial and parenting arrangements during relationship
financial assistance provided by the wife’s sister
the current proceedings
the trial
credibility issues  as mentioned earlier, the husband contended that the relationship only commenced when the parties married and then, when pressed, when the wife gave birth to their first child. when pressed further, he eventually conceded the relationship had commenced at least by the time the wife became pregnant in 2018.[18] it was put to the husband in cross-examination that he was attempting to portray the relationship as being as short as possible because that would be better for him in the property settlement. he responded “of course”.[19] (b) for a significant part of the trial the husband refused to acknowledge the wife’s contributions as homemaker and parent, insisting that his contributions outweighed hers because he made significant contributions in these roles outside of work hours. when asked to concede at least that the wife did more parenting than him, especially when the children were infants and he was working full-time, the husband refused to make the concession, pointing out that he took six weeks off work when the children were born and cared for the children when he came home from work each day and during weekends.[20] however, during submissions at the end of the trial he very readily conceded that the wife’s contributions as homemaker and parent during the marriage were greater than his. he said “well, yes, of course”, as if it was an obvious proposition, despite his earlier resistance to it.[21] however, he refused to acknowledge the significance of those contributions because, when asked to concede that the wife’s parenting and homemaking were an indirect contribution to the acquisition or preservation of assets because they enabled him to go to work full-time without incurring child care costs, the husband responded “well, the fact was, your honour, that i actually didn’t need to go to work, but i just chose to... because i already had a passive income that could have supported the family and a huge amount of cash.” [22] the husband also initially refused to accept that the wife had borne the greater burden of the children’s care post-separation but eventually conceded that was so.[23] the husband’s resistance to these obvious propositions was reflective of his rigid adherence to his own narrative and refusal to acknowledge the wife’s contribution on any level during the marriage. it did not reflect well on him and undermined his credibility generally. (c) the husband admitted that, in order to claim tax deductions for expenses for the suburb k property, he had declared on his tax returns that his mother was paying rent of $400 per week when, in fact, she paid no rent to him. he appeared nonplussed about making false declarations to the australian tax office. he also said during cross-examination that his mother paid rent to him when she lived in the property but, moments later, conceded that she paid no rent.[24] (d) the husband said in cross-examination that he and his mother had entered into a formal rental agreement. he was asked to produce the agreement the next day. the following day he said he had remembered that the agreement was verbal, not written. (e) the husband initially denied telling the wife in december 2015 that she had to vacate the former matrimonial home or pay market rent plus a 100 per cent administrative loading.[25] when pressed, he moderated his evidence to say he could not remember doing so. when the email was produced, he conceded sending it. he was asked what he intended the 100 per cent administrative fee to cover. he said it was for utilities and other expenses related to the house. his initial evidence about it was completely wrong. (f) most extraordinarily of all, the husband sought orders requiring the wife to pay him just under $1.7 million within seven days and, if she failed to do so, to pay him $1.9 million within 28 days (facilitated in part by immediately selling the house she had purchased after separation and giving him the entire proceeds of sale) and, otherwise, the parties each keep the items of property and superannuation in their possession or control. this would result in the wife taking nothing other than the share portfolio she had prior to the relationship and her superannuation which, as a result of her childcare responsibilities, was less than the husband’s, and two vehicles she acquired post-separation. she would also continue to be liable for the $639,785 loan to her sister which funded the purchase of the wife’s home post-separation. by contrast, the husband would take all of the real assets, his more valuable superannuation and his super fund 2 pension in the payment phase. it was pointed out to the husband that, from an asset pool of more than $2 million, this would mean he would take almost everything and the wife almost nothing. he conceded this was so but said it was reasonable because it would effectively put him back to his pre-relationship position. he seemed perfectly comfortable with this notion. his proposal would not, in fact, restore the pre-relationship position of the parties. it would see him significantly enriched by the fruits of both parties’ labour and by the value of the house the wife purchased after separation while leaving the actual loan repayment to the wife. during cross examination the husband said that he believed the wife could pay the sum of $1.7 million from financial resources she had in the form of cash provided by her sister. [26] he acknowledged that, if the wife was unable to find the funds, the orders sought by him would require her to sell her home in which she lived with the children in order to pay him $1.9 million. given the value of the suburb n property was about $900,000, this would still require the wife to take out a loan of $1 million and continue to carry responsibility for the loan from her sister. he refused to accept the proposition that the wife had no prospects of obtaining a million-dollar loan.[27] (g) the husband declared in his financial statement filed on 6 july 2022 that his current child support assessment for both children is $840 per year or $16 a week in round terms. he agreed he was in arrears of child support and had entered into a payment plan with the child support agency to pay the arrears over time. at the time the husband gave evidence he said he was paying wife $80 a month in child support. this equates to $18.50 a week which presumably incorporates a payment of approximately $2.50 a week towards the arrears. he queried whether the wife was actually spending that amount on the children. it was pointed out to him that this was a ridiculous notion when this was less than $10 per child per week and he had earlier given evidence was that he spent $400 a week on food and had the children for less time than the wife. the husband agreed that his child support was a tiny proportion of what the wife would be spending on the children but said that his statement that she may not be spending it on the children was made “in the context of the range of possibilities”.[28] this was entirely mean spirited and caused me to find that the wife could not expect to rely on the husband as a generous co-parent into the future. (h) the husband agreed that he had previously sought an adjustment in his child support liability on the basis that the wife was entitled to receive a share of the rental income from her sister’s property in queensland. he agreed that the child support agency investigated his assertion and found that the wife had no interest in the property. nevertheless, he repeatedly asserted in the current proceedings that the wife was entitled to that income.[29] (i) the husband conceded that, in accordance with court orders, he was required to undergo a drug test in 2021. he agreed that he did not undertake the test. he said he could not get the test done within the 24 hours required but he then made no attempt in any event because he could not afford the cost of the test, which was $150. that evidence was ridiculous and undermined his credibility.   for a significant part of the trial the husband refused to acknowledge the wife’s contributions as homemaker and parent, insisting that his contributions outweighed hers because he made significant contributions in these roles outside of work hours. when asked to concede at least that the wife did more parenting than him, especially when the children were infants and he was working full-time, the husband refused to make the concession, pointing out that he took six weeks off work when the children were born and cared for the children when he came home from work each day and during weekends.[20] however, during submissions at the end of the trial he very readily conceded that the wife’s contributions as homemaker and parent during the marriage were greater than his. he said “well, yes, of course”, as if it was an obvious proposition, despite his earlier resistance to it.[21] however, he refused to acknowledge the significance of those contributions because, when asked to concede that the wife’s parenting and homemaking were an indirect contribution to the acquisition or preservation of assets because they enabled him to go to work full-time without incurring child care costs, the husband responded “well, the fact was, your honour, that i actually didn’t need to go to work, but i just chose to... because i already had a passive income that could have supported the family and a huge amount of cash.” [22] the husband also initially refused to accept that the wife had borne the greater burden of the children’s care post-separation but eventually conceded that was so.[23] the husband’s resistance to these obvious propositions was reflective of his rigid adherence to his own narrative and refusal to acknowledge the wife’s contribution on any level during the marriage. it did not reflect well on him and undermined his credibility generally. (c) the husband admitted that, in order to claim tax deductions for expenses for the suburb k property, he had declared on his tax returns that his mother was paying rent of $400 per week when, in fact, she paid no rent to him. he appeared nonplussed about making false declarations to the australian tax office. he also said during cross-examination that his mother paid rent to him when she lived in the property but, moments later, conceded that she paid no rent.[24] (d) the husband said in cross-examination that he and his mother had entered into a formal rental agreement. he was asked to produce the agreement the next day. the following day he said he had remembered that the agreement was verbal, not written. (e) the husband initially denied telling the wife in december 2015 that she had to vacate the former matrimonial home or pay market rent plus a 100 per cent administrative loading.[25] when pressed, he moderated his evidence to say he could not remember doing so. when the email was produced, he conceded sending it. he was asked what he intended the 100 per cent administrative fee to cover. he said it was for utilities and other expenses related to the house. his initial evidence about it was completely wrong. (f) most extraordinarily of all, the husband sought orders requiring the wife to pay him just under $1.7 million within seven days and, if she failed to do so, to pay him $1.9 million within 28 days (facilitated in part by immediately selling the house she had purchased after separation and giving him the entire proceeds of sale) and, otherwise, the parties each keep the items of property and superannuation in their possession or control. this would result in the wife taking nothing other than the share portfolio she had prior to the relationship and her superannuation which, as a result of her childcare responsibilities, was less than the husband’s, and two vehicles she acquired post-separation. she would also continue to be liable for the $639,785 loan to her sister which funded the purchase of the wife’s home post-separation. by contrast, the husband would take all of the real assets, his more valuable superannuation and his super fund 2 pension in the payment phase. it was pointed out to the husband that, from an asset pool of more than $2 million, this would mean he would take almost everything and the wife almost nothing. he conceded this was so but said it was reasonable because it would effectively put him back to his pre-relationship position. he seemed perfectly comfortable with this notion. his proposal would not, in fact, restore the pre-relationship position of the parties. it would see him significantly enriched by the fruits of both parties’ labour and by the value of the house the wife purchased after separation while leaving the actual loan repayment to the wife. during cross examination the husband said that he believed the wife could pay the sum of $1.7 million from financial resources she had in the form of cash provided by her sister. [26] he acknowledged that, if the wife was unable to find the funds, the orders sought by him would require her to sell her home in which she lived with the children in order to pay him $1.9 million. given the value of the suburb n property was about $900,000, this would still require the wife to take out a loan of $1 million and continue to carry responsibility for the loan from her sister. he refused to accept the proposition that the wife had no prospects of obtaining a million-dollar loan.[27] (g) the husband declared in his financial statement filed on 6 july 2022 that his current child support assessment for both children is $840 per year or $16 a week in round terms. he agreed he was in arrears of child support and had entered into a payment plan with the child support agency to pay the arrears over time. at the time the husband gave evidence he said he was paying wife $80 a month in child support. this equates to $18.50 a week which presumably incorporates a payment of approximately $2.50 a week towards the arrears. he queried whether the wife was actually spending that amount on the children. it was pointed out to him that this was a ridiculous notion when this was less than $10 per child per week and he had earlier given evidence was that he spent $400 a week on food and had the children for less time than the wife. the husband agreed that his child support was a tiny proportion of what the wife would be spending on the children but said that his statement that she may not be spending it on the children was made “in the context of the range of possibilities”.[28] this was entirely mean spirited and caused me to find that the wife could not expect to rely on the husband as a generous co-parent into the future. (h) the husband agreed that he had previously sought an adjustment in his child support liability on the basis that the wife was entitled to receive a share of the rental income from her sister’s property in queensland. he agreed that the child support agency investigated his assertion and found that the wife had no interest in the property. nevertheless, he repeatedly asserted in the current proceedings that the wife was entitled to that income.[29] (i) the husband conceded that, in accordance with court orders, he was required to undergo a drug test in 2021. he agreed that he did not undertake the test. he said he could not get the test done within the 24 hours required but he then made no attempt in any event because he could not afford the cost of the test, which was $150. that evidence was ridiculous and undermined his credibility.   the husband admitted that, in order to claim tax deductions for expenses for the suburb k property, he had declared on his tax returns that his mother was paying rent of $400 per week when, in fact, she paid no rent to him. he appeared nonplussed about making false declarations to the australian tax office. he also said during cross-examination that his mother paid rent to him when she lived in the property but, moments later, conceded that she paid no rent.[24] (d) the husband said in cross-examination that he and his mother had entered into a formal rental agreement. he was asked to produce the agreement the next day. the following day he said he had remembered that the agreement was verbal, not written. (e) the husband initially denied telling the wife in december 2015 that she had to vacate the former matrimonial home or pay market rent plus a 100 per cent administrative loading.[25] when pressed, he moderated his evidence to say he could not remember doing so. when the email was produced, he conceded sending it. he was asked what he intended the 100 per cent administrative fee to cover. he said it was for utilities and other expenses related to the house. his initial evidence about it was completely wrong. (f) most extraordinarily of all, the husband sought orders requiring the wife to pay him just under $1.7 million within seven days and, if she failed to do so, to pay him $1.9 million within 28 days (facilitated in part by immediately selling the house she had purchased after separation and giving him the entire proceeds of sale) and, otherwise, the parties each keep the items of property and superannuation in their possession or control. this would result in the wife taking nothing other than the share portfolio she had prior to the relationship and her superannuation which, as a result of her childcare responsibilities, was less than the husband’s, and two vehicles she acquired post-separation. she would also continue to be liable for the $639,785 loan to her sister which funded the purchase of the wife’s home post-separation. by contrast, the husband would take all of the real assets, his more valuable superannuation and his super fund 2 pension in the payment phase. it was pointed out to the husband that, from an asset pool of more than $2 million, this would mean he would take almost everything and the wife almost nothing. he conceded this was so but said it was reasonable because it would effectively put him back to his pre-relationship position. he seemed perfectly comfortable with this notion. his proposal would not, in fact, restore the pre-relationship position of the parties. it would see him significantly enriched by the fruits of both parties’ labour and by the value of the house the wife purchased after separation while leaving the actual loan repayment to the wife. during cross examination the husband said that he believed the wife could pay the sum of $1.7 million from financial resources she had in the form of cash provided by her sister. [26] he acknowledged that, if the wife was unable to find the funds, the orders sought by him would require her to sell her home in which she lived with the children in order to pay him $1.9 million. given the value of the suburb n property was about $900,000, this would still require the wife to take out a loan of $1 million and continue to carry responsibility for the loan from her sister. he refused to accept the proposition that the wife had no prospects of obtaining a million-dollar loan.[27] (g) the husband declared in his financial statement filed on 6 july 2022 that his current child support assessment for both children is $840 per year or $16 a week in round terms. he agreed he was in arrears of child support and had entered into a payment plan with the child support agency to pay the arrears over time. at the time the husband gave evidence he said he was paying wife $80 a month in child support. this equates to $18.50 a week which presumably incorporates a payment of approximately $2.50 a week towards the arrears. he queried whether the wife was actually spending that amount on the children. it was pointed out to him that this was a ridiculous notion when this was less than $10 per child per week and he had earlier given evidence was that he spent $400 a week on food and had the children for less time than the wife. the husband agreed that his child support was a tiny proportion of what the wife would be spending on the children but said that his statement that she may not be spending it on the children was made “in the context of the range of possibilities”.[28] this was entirely mean spirited and caused me to find that the wife could not expect to rely on the husband as a generous co-parent into the future. (h) the husband agreed that he had previously sought an adjustment in his child support liability on the basis that the wife was entitled to receive a share of the rental income from her sister’s property in queensland. he agreed that the child support agency investigated his assertion and found that the wife had no interest in the property. nevertheless, he repeatedly asserted in the current proceedings that the wife was entitled to that income.[29] (i) the husband conceded that, in accordance with court orders, he was required to undergo a drug test in 2021. he agreed that he did not undertake the test. he said he could not get the test done within the 24 hours required but he then made no attempt in any event because he could not afford the cost of the test, which was $150. that evidence was ridiculous and undermined his credibility.   the husband said in cross-examination that he and his mother had entered into a formal rental agreement. he was asked to produce the agreement the next day. the following day he said he had remembered that the agreement was verbal, not written. (e) the husband initially denied telling the wife in december 2015 that she had to vacate the former matrimonial home or pay market rent plus a 100 per cent administrative loading.[25] when pressed, he moderated his evidence to say he could not remember doing so. when the email was produced, he conceded sending it. he was asked what he intended the 100 per cent administrative fee to cover. he said it was for utilities and other expenses related to the house. his initial evidence about it was completely wrong. (f) most extraordinarily of all, the husband sought orders requiring the wife to pay him just under $1.7 million within seven days and, if she failed to do so, to pay him $1.9 million within 28 days (facilitated in part by immediately selling the house she had purchased after separation and giving him the entire proceeds of sale) and, otherwise, the parties each keep the items of property and superannuation in their possession or control. this would result in the wife taking nothing other than the share portfolio she had prior to the relationship and her superannuation which, as a result of her childcare responsibilities, was less than the husband’s, and two vehicles she acquired post-separation. she would also continue to be liable for the $639,785 loan to her sister which funded the purchase of the wife’s home post-separation. by contrast, the husband would take all of the real assets, his more valuable superannuation and his super fund 2 pension in the payment phase. it was pointed out to the husband that, from an asset pool of more than $2 million, this would mean he would take almost everything and the wife almost nothing. he conceded this was so but said it was reasonable because it would effectively put him back to his pre-relationship position. he seemed perfectly comfortable with this notion. his proposal would not, in fact, restore the pre-relationship position of the parties. it would see him significantly enriched by the fruits of both parties’ labour and by the value of the house the wife purchased after separation while leaving the actual loan repayment to the wife. during cross examination the husband said that he believed the wife could pay the sum of $1.7 million from financial resources she had in the form of cash provided by her sister. [26] he acknowledged that, if the wife was unable to find the funds, the orders sought by him would require her to sell her home in which she lived with the children in order to pay him $1.9 million. given the value of the suburb n property was about $900,000, this would still require the wife to take out a loan of $1 million and continue to carry responsibility for the loan from her sister. he refused to accept the proposition that the wife had no prospects of obtaining a million-dollar loan.[27] (g) the husband declared in his financial statement filed on 6 july 2022 that his current child support assessment for both children is $840 per year or $16 a week in round terms. he agreed he was in arrears of child support and had entered into a payment plan with the child support agency to pay the arrears over time. at the time the husband gave evidence he said he was paying wife $80 a month in child support. this equates to $18.50 a week which presumably incorporates a payment of approximately $2.50 a week towards the arrears. he queried whether the wife was actually spending that amount on the children. it was pointed out to him that this was a ridiculous notion when this was less than $10 per child per week and he had earlier given evidence was that he spent $400 a week on food and had the children for less time than the wife. the husband agreed that his child support was a tiny proportion of what the wife would be spending on the children but said that his statement that she may not be spending it on the children was made “in the context of the range of possibilities”.[28] this was entirely mean spirited and caused me to find that the wife could not expect to rely on the husband as a generous co-parent into the future. (h) the husband agreed that he had previously sought an adjustment in his child support liability on the basis that the wife was entitled to receive a share of the rental income from her sister’s property in queensland. he agreed that the child support agency investigated his assertion and found that the wife had no interest in the property. nevertheless, he repeatedly asserted in the current proceedings that the wife was entitled to that income.[29] (i) the husband conceded that, in accordance with court orders, he was required to undergo a drug test in 2021. he agreed that he did not undertake the test. he said he could not get the test done within the 24 hours required but he then made no attempt in any event because he could not afford the cost of the test, which was $150. that evidence was ridiculous and undermined his credibility.   the husband initially denied telling the wife in december 2015 that she had to vacate the former matrimonial home or pay market rent plus a 100 per cent administrative loading.[25] when pressed, he moderated his evidence to say he could not remember doing so. when the email was produced, he conceded sending it. he was asked what he intended the 100 per cent administrative fee to cover. he said it was for utilities and other expenses related to the house. his initial evidence about it was completely wrong. (f) most extraordinarily of all, the husband sought orders requiring the wife to pay him just under $1.7 million within seven days and, if she failed to do so, to pay him $1.9 million within 28 days (facilitated in part by immediately selling the house she had purchased after separation and giving him the entire proceeds of sale) and, otherwise, the parties each keep the items of property and superannuation in their possession or control. this would result in the wife taking nothing other than the share portfolio she had prior to the relationship and her superannuation which, as a result of her childcare responsibilities, was less than the husband’s, and two vehicles she acquired post-separation. she would also continue to be liable for the $639,785 loan to her sister which funded the purchase of the wife’s home post-separation. by contrast, the husband would take all of the real assets, his more valuable superannuation and his super fund 2 pension in the payment phase. it was pointed out to the husband that, from an asset pool of more than $2 million, this would mean he would take almost everything and the wife almost nothing. he conceded this was so but said it was reasonable because it would effectively put him back to his pre-relationship position. he seemed perfectly comfortable with this notion. his proposal would not, in fact, restore the pre-relationship position of the parties. it would see him significantly enriched by the fruits of both parties’ labour and by the value of the house the wife purchased after separation while leaving the actual loan repayment to the wife. during cross examination the husband said that he believed the wife could pay the sum of $1.7 million from financial resources she had in the form of cash provided by her sister. [26] he acknowledged that, if the wife was unable to find the funds, the orders sought by him would require her to sell her home in which she lived with the children in order to pay him $1.9 million. given the value of the suburb n property was about $900,000, this would still require the wife to take out a loan of $1 million and continue to carry responsibility for the loan from her sister. he refused to accept the proposition that the wife had no prospects of obtaining a million-dollar loan.[27] (g) the husband declared in his financial statement filed on 6 july 2022 that his current child support assessment for both children is $840 per year or $16 a week in round terms. he agreed he was in arrears of child support and had entered into a payment plan with the child support agency to pay the arrears over time. at the time the husband gave evidence he said he was paying wife $80 a month in child support. this equates to $18.50 a week which presumably incorporates a payment of approximately $2.50 a week towards the arrears. he queried whether the wife was actually spending that amount on the children. it was pointed out to him that this was a ridiculous notion when this was less than $10 per child per week and he had earlier given evidence was that he spent $400 a week on food and had the children for less time than the wife. the husband agreed that his child support was a tiny proportion of what the wife would be spending on the children but said that his statement that she may not be spending it on the children was made “in the context of the range of possibilities”.[28] this was entirely mean spirited and caused me to find that the wife could not expect to rely on the husband as a generous co-parent into the future. (h) the husband agreed that he had previously sought an adjustment in his child support liability on the basis that the wife was entitled to receive a share of the rental income from her sister’s property in queensland. he agreed that the child support agency investigated his assertion and found that the wife had no interest in the property. nevertheless, he repeatedly asserted in the current proceedings that the wife was entitled to that income.[29] (i) the husband conceded that, in accordance with court orders, he was required to undergo a drug test in 2021. he agreed that he did not undertake the test. he said he could not get the test done within the 24 hours required but he then made no attempt in any event because he could not afford the cost of the test, which was $150. that evidence was ridiculous and undermined his credibility.   most extraordinarily of all, the husband sought orders requiring the wife to pay him just under $1.7 million within seven days and, if she failed to do so, to pay him $1.9 million within 28 days (facilitated in part by immediately selling the house she had purchased after separation and giving him the entire proceeds of sale) and, otherwise, the parties each keep the items of property and superannuation in their possession or control. this would result in the wife taking nothing other than the share portfolio she had prior to the relationship and her superannuation which, as a result of her childcare responsibilities, was less than the husband’s, and two vehicles she acquired post-separation. she would also continue to be liable for the $639,785 loan to her sister which funded the purchase of the wife’s home post-separation. by contrast, the husband would take all of the real assets, his more valuable superannuation and his super fund 2 pension in the payment phase. it was pointed out to the husband that, from an asset pool of more than $2 million, this would mean he would take almost everything and the wife almost nothing. he conceded this was so but said it was reasonable because it would effectively put him back to his pre-relationship position. he seemed perfectly comfortable with this notion. his proposal would not, in fact, restore the pre-relationship position of the parties. it would see him significantly enriched by the fruits of both parties’ labour and by the value of the house the wife purchased after separation while leaving the actual loan repayment to the wife. during cross examination the husband said that he believed the wife could pay the sum of $1.7 million from financial resources she had in the form of cash provided by her sister. [26] he acknowledged that, if the wife was unable to find the funds, the orders sought by him would require her to sell her home in which she lived with the children in order to pay him $1.9 million. given the value of the suburb n property was about $900,000, this would still require the wife to take out a loan of $1 million and continue to carry responsibility for the loan from her sister. he refused to accept the proposition that the wife had no prospects of obtaining a million-dollar loan.[27] (g) the husband declared in his financial statement filed on 6 july 2022 that his current child support assessment for both children is $840 per year or $16 a week in round terms. he agreed he was in arrears of child support and had entered into a payment plan with the child support agency to pay the arrears over time. at the time the husband gave evidence he said he was paying wife $80 a month in child support. this equates to $18.50 a week which presumably incorporates a payment of approximately $2.50 a week towards the arrears. he queried whether the wife was actually spending that amount on the children. it was pointed out to him that this was a ridiculous notion when this was less than $10 per child per week and he had earlier given evidence was that he spent $400 a week on food and had the children for less time than the wife. the husband agreed that his child support was a tiny proportion of what the wife would be spending on the children but said that his statement that she may not be spending it on the children was made “in the context of the range of possibilities”.[28] this was entirely mean spirited and caused me to find that the wife could not expect to rely on the husband as a generous co-parent into the future. (h) the husband agreed that he had previously sought an adjustment in his child support liability on the basis that the wife was entitled to receive a share of the rental income from her sister’s property in queensland. he agreed that the child support agency investigated his assertion and found that the wife had no interest in the property. nevertheless, he repeatedly asserted in the current proceedings that the wife was entitled to that income.[29] (i) the husband conceded that, in accordance with court orders, he was required to undergo a drug test in 2021. he agreed that he did not undertake the test. he said he could not get the test done within the 24 hours required but he then made no attempt in any event because he could not afford the cost of the test, which was $150. that evidence was ridiculous and undermined his credibility.   the husband declared in his financial statement filed on 6 july 2022 that his current child support assessment for both children is $840 per year or $16 a week in round terms. he agreed he was in arrears of child support and had entered into a payment plan with the child support agency to pay the arrears over time. at the time the husband gave evidence he said he was paying wife $80 a month in child support. this equates to $18.50 a week which presumably incorporates a payment of approximately $2.50 a week towards the arrears. he queried whether the wife was actually spending that amount on the children. it was pointed out to him that this was a ridiculous notion when this was less than $10 per child per week and he had earlier given evidence was that he spent $400 a week on food and had the children for less time than the wife. the husband agreed that his child support was a tiny proportion of what the wife would be spending on the children but said that his statement that she may not be spending it on the children was made “in the context of the range of possibilities”.[28] this was entirely mean spirited and caused me to find that the wife could not expect to rely on the husband as a generous co-parent into the future. (h) the husband agreed that he had previously sought an adjustment in his child support liability on the basis that the wife was entitled to receive a share of the rental income from her sister’s property in queensland. he agreed that the child support agency investigated his assertion and found that the wife had no interest in the property. nevertheless, he repeatedly asserted in the current proceedings that the wife was entitled to that income.[29] (i) the husband conceded that, in accordance with court orders, he was required to undergo a drug test in 2021. he agreed that he did not undertake the test. he said he could not get the test done within the 24 hours required but he then made no attempt in any event because he could not afford the cost of the test, which was $150. that evidence was ridiculous and undermined his credibility.   the husband agreed that he had previously sought an adjustment in his child support liability on the basis that the wife was entitled to receive a share of the rental income from her sister’s property in queensland. he agreed that the child support agency investigated his assertion and found that the wife had no interest in the property. nevertheless, he repeatedly asserted in the current proceedings that the wife was entitled to that income.[29] (i) the husband conceded that, in accordance with court orders, he was required to undergo a drug test in 2021. he agreed that he did not undertake the test. he said he could not get the test done within the 24 hours required but he then made no attempt in any event because he could not afford the cost of the test, which was $150. that evidence was ridiculous and undermined his credibility.   the husband conceded that, in accordance with court orders, he was required to undergo a drug test in 2021. he agreed that he did not undertake the test. he said he could not get the test done within the 24 hours required but he then made no attempt in any event because he could not afford the cost of the test, which was $150. that evidence was ridiculous and undermined his credibility.
the legal principles  first, the contributions of the parties to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of the property and to the welfare of the family as provided in subsections 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) of the family law act, and (b) secondly, the matters set out in the remaining subsections of 79(4) which incorporate section 75(2) of the act. those matters broadly require a consideration of the financial position and resources of the parties, their age and state of health, their necessary commitments in supporting themselves or any other person, the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of either party, the effect of any proposed order on the earning capacity of either party and any other fact or circumstance which the justice of the case requires to be taken into account.   secondly, the matters set out in the remaining subsections of 79(4) which incorporate section 75(2) of the act. those matters broadly require a consideration of the financial position and resources of the parties, their age and state of health, their necessary commitments in supporting themselves or any other person, the duration of the marriage and the extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of either party, the effect of any proposed order on the earning capacity of either party and any other fact or circumstance which the justice of the case requires to be taken into account.
the property pool
contributions  the wife’s initial contribution comprising her share portfolio and, to a small extent, her parenting of the child x alone for five months, (b) the various contributions made by the wife during the eight year relationship, (c) the post-separation acquisition of property by the wife, and (d) the extra post-separation parenting contributions made by the wife.   the various contributions made by the wife during the eight year relationship, (c) the post-separation acquisition of property by the wife, and (d) the extra post-separation parenting contributions made by the wife.   the post-separation acquisition of property by the wife, and (d) the extra post-separation parenting contributions made by the wife.   the extra post-separation parenting contributions made by the wife.
section 75(2) factors
2016 $109,698 2017 $192,222 2018 $121,765 2019 $144,529
2017 $192,222 2018 $121,765 2019 $144,529
2018 $121,765 2019 $144,529
2019 $144,529
justice and equity considerations
associate: dated: 23 march 2023
dated: 23 march 2023
[1] affidavit of husband filed 3 february 2022 at paragraph 15[2] ibid at paragraph 3[3] transcript of proceedings dated 18 july 2022 at pages 42 and 43[4] affidavit of husband filed 3 february 2022 at annexure c[5] affidavit of wife filed 28 june 2022 at paragraph 42[6] exhibit w1 at page 1[7] affidavit of husband filed 3 february 2022 at paragraph 11[8] affidavit of wife filed 28 june 2022 at paragraph 64[9] ibid at paragraph 62[10] affidavit of wife filed 28 june 2022 at paragraph 65[11] transcript of proceedings dated 18 july 2022 at page 49[12] affidavit of husband filed 7 july 2022 at paragraph 16[13] ibid at paragraphs 13 to 16[14] affidavit of wife filed 28 june 2022 at annexure h[15] affidavit of wife filed 28 june 2022 at paragraph 57[16] transcript of proceedings dated 18 july 2022 at page 92[17] ibid at page 97[18] transcript of proceedings dated 18 july 2022 at pages 41 to 42[19] ibid at page 42[20] transcript of proceedings dated 18 july 2022 at pages 50 to 53[21] transcript of proceedings dated 19 july 2022 at page 193[22] ibid at page 194[23] transcript of proceedings dated 18 july 2022 at pages 45 to 46[24] ibid at page 44[25] transcript of proceedings dated 18 july 2022 at page 69[26] ibid at pages 33 to 34[27] transcript of proceedings dated 18 july 2022 at pages 35 to 37[28] ibid at pages 60 to 61[29] ibid at pages 71 to 73[30] family law act 1975 (cth) s 79(2)[31] transcript of proceedings dated 18 july 2022 at page 103 and 19 july 2022 at page 187[32] transcript of proceedings dated 18 july 2022 at page 105[33] affidavit of husband filed 3 february 2022 at paragraph 37[34] ibid at paragraph 33[35] transcript of proceedings dated 18 july 2022 at page 57[36] ibid at page 30