last updated: 10 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rabbani & rabbani [2023] fedcfamc2f 292
orders
the court orders that:  approaching or contacting the mother or any of the children and/or causing any third person to do so on his behalf by any means including electronic communication, (b) causing or threatening to cause bodily harm to the mother and/or any of the children, (c) harassing or stalking the mother and/or the children, (d) attending or being within 200 metres of:- (i) the place of residence or work of the mother, (ii) any school, daycare, before/after school care or any other extra- curricular activity or service at which the children attend.   causing or threatening to cause bodily harm to the mother and/or any of the children, (c) harassing or stalking the mother and/or the children, (d) attending or being within 200 metres of:- (i) the place of residence or work of the mother, (ii) any school, daycare, before/after school care or any other extra- curricular activity or service at which the children attend.   harassing or stalking the mother and/or the children, (d) attending or being within 200 metres of:- (i) the place of residence or work of the mother, (ii) any school, daycare, before/after school care or any other extra- curricular activity or service at which the children attend.   attending or being within 200 metres of:- (i) the place of residence or work of the mother, (ii) any school, daycare, before/after school care or any other extra- curricular activity or service at which the children attend.   the place of residence or work of the mother, (ii) any school, daycare, before/after school care or any other extra- curricular activity or service at which the children attend.  ) any school, daycare, before/after school care or any other extra- curricular activity or service at which the children attend.   the mother to file and serve by no later than 4:00 pm on 29 march 2023 a short minute of order particularising any orders as to costs she seeks against the father and in response to the costs being sought by the independent children’s lawyer, (b) the father is to file and serve by no later than 4:00 pm on 5 april 2023 a short minute of order in response to the costs sought by the independent children’s lawyer and any costs sought by the mother, (c) each party is to file and serve any affidavit and/or financial statement upon which they seek to rely by no later than 4:00 pm 10 april 2023, (d) any objection by the independent children’s lawyer or the parties to the determination of the costs issue being determined on the papers is to be advised to chambers and the other parties via email by no later than 4:00 pm 14 april 2023, (e) in the event there is no objection to the costs issue being heard in chambers then each party is to file and serve any written submissions of no more than two pages by no later than 4:00 pm on 21 april 2023, (f) in the event a party or the independent children’s lawyer objects to the costs issue being determined in chambers then it will be listed for hearing at 10:00 am on 26 april 2023.   the father is to file and serve by no later than 4:00 pm on 5 april 2023 a short minute of order in response to the costs sought by the independent children’s lawyer and any costs sought by the mother, (c) each party is to file and serve any affidavit and/or financial statement upon which they seek to rely by no later than 4:00 pm 10 april 2023, (d) any objection by the independent children’s lawyer or the parties to the determination of the costs issue being determined on the papers is to be advised to chambers and the other parties via email by no later than 4:00 pm 14 april 2023, (e) in the event there is no objection to the costs issue being heard in chambers then each party is to file and serve any written submissions of no more than two pages by no later than 4:00 pm on 21 april 2023, (f) in the event a party or the independent children’s lawyer objects to the costs issue being determined in chambers then it will be listed for hearing at 10:00 am on 26 april 2023.   each party is to file and serve any affidavit and/or financial statement upon which they seek to rely by no later than 4:00 pm 10 april 2023, (d) any objection by the independent children’s lawyer or the parties to the determination of the costs issue being determined on the papers is to be advised to chambers and the other parties via email by no later than 4:00 pm 14 april 2023, (e) in the event there is no objection to the costs issue being heard in chambers then each party is to file and serve any written submissions of no more than two pages by no later than 4:00 pm on 21 april 2023, (f) in the event a party or the independent children’s lawyer objects to the costs issue being determined in chambers then it will be listed for hearing at 10:00 am on 26 april 2023.   any objection by the independent children’s lawyer or the parties to the determination of the costs issue being determined on the papers is to be advised to chambers and the other parties via email by no later than 4:00 pm 14 april 2023, (e) in the event there is no objection to the costs issue being heard in chambers then each party is to file and serve any written submissions of no more than two pages by no later than 4:00 pm on 21 april 2023, (f) in the event a party or the independent children’s lawyer objects to the costs issue being determined in chambers then it will be listed for hearing at 10:00 am on 26 april 2023.   in the event there is no objection to the costs issue being heard in chambers then each party is to file and serve any written submissions of no more than two pages by no later than 4:00 pm on 21 april 2023, (f) in the event a party or the independent children’s lawyer objects to the costs issue being determined in chambers then it will be listed for hearing at 10:00 am on 26 april 2023.   in the event a party or the independent children’s lawyer objects to the costs issue being determined in chambers then it will be listed for hearing at 10:00 am on 26 april 2023.
the court declares that:
it is ordered by the court that:
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction
the parties’ proposals
the issues
background
we are instructed our client’s position is as follows:- in the interim he would like to spend time with the children on an unsupervised basis from 2 pm to 7 pm saturday and sunday every fortnight. further our client would like to pick the children up from school every monday and tuesday returning them home after spending about an hour with them. we are instructed our client has no interest in spending time with the children on a supervised basis. if there is no agreement with respect to unsupervised time in the interim our client proposes to discontinue his parenting application and disengage with these proceedings. kindly indicate whether the above is agreeable because if not our client would like to seek leave from the court on the next occasion and indicate he wishes to disengage from these proceedings. should you have any further enquiries please do not hesitate to contact mr danawe solicitor of our office directly.
the children
the parties
the witnesses
the family report
the law  ensuring that children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent consistent with the best interests of the child, and (b) protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   protecting children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence, and (c) ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full potential, and (d) ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   ensuring that parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the care, welfare and development of their children.   children have the right to know and be cared for by both their parents, regardless of whether their parents are married, separated, have never married or have never lived together, and (b) children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other people significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and other relatives), and (c) parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents jointly share duties and responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children, and (d) parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   parents should agree about the future parenting of their children, and (e) children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).   children have a right to enjoy their culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture).
...protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse, while in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s) or any other person who has the care of the child.
the primary considerations  the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
meaningful relationship
...should consider and weigh the evidence at the date of the hearing and determine how, if it is in a child’s best interests, orders can be framed to ensure the particular child has a meaningful relationship with both parents...  2] ...no doubt in the majority of cases there will be a positive benefit to a child of having a significant relationship with both parents, but there will also be some cases where there will be no positive benefit to be derived by a child by a court attempting to craft orders to foster a relationship with one parent if this would not be in the child’s best interests.  ] ...whilst s 60cc (2a) demands that greater weight be given to the consideration in s 60cc(2)(b) – something entirely consistent with the approach of the courts since the commencement of the act – the particular facts and circumstances of each individual case nevertheless require a careful evaluation and balancing of considerations, and all the more so when what is at stake is the potential for a child to never know their parent.
family violence  an assault, or (b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour, or (c) stalking, or (d) repeated derogatory taunts, or (e) intentionally damaging or destroying property, or (f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, or (g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she would otherwise have had, or (h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable living expenses of the family member, or his or her child, at a time when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial support, or (i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or her family, friends or culture, or (j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her liberty.
such behaviour must still meet the definition as contained within s 4ab(1).
123. coerce is defined in the 7th edition of the macquarie dictionary relevantly as
1. to restrain or constrain by force, law or authority, force or compel, as to do something. 2. to compel by forcible action
124. control is defined in the 7th edition of the macquarie dictionary relevantly as:
1. to exercise restraint or direction over, dominate, command
125. the phrase “coerces or controls” is expressed disjunctively. however it may be seen that the two concepts are closely related. together they form an expanded concept of the exercise of power, to restrain another or to cause another to act, by force, domination or command...
generally, coercive control is understood as a course of conduct aimed at dominating and controlling another person, including a family member.
the assessment of whether conduct that falls within one of the provided examples constitutes family violence as defined in s 4ab(1) of the act necessarily requires that conduct to be considered in the context in which it occurred.
the father’s allegations
the mother’s allegations
criminal charges for stalking/intimidation and application for an avo of 2020
if you think you are going to take my kids away from me i will kill you, them and myself.
if i can’t have you all, no one will. i have thought about all the ways i could kill you. i brought rat poison from the internet to put in your drink. no one could put it back to me because i deleted the internet history. i could push you off the balcony and make it look like an accident. i could suffocate you with a pillow while you slept.
i’m just telling you what will happen if i don’t get what i want, if i don’t see the kids every day. just remember that i will do this if you try to take the kids from me. i am not scared of anyone.
mother: i want to proceed with getting divorced. we have been separated for a long time now and we need to live apart. father: you can start divorce proceedings. i will destroy your business in court. mother: and what about the kids, i’m not going to sign them over to live with you. what happens? father: you know what’s gonna [sic] happen after that, you know. i told you last time what’s gonna [sic] happen, i don’t have to say it again and again and again, you know what’s gonna [sic] happen.
i will be home at 11. i want my children there when i get home.[2]
you know what’s going to happen. i told you last time what’s going to happen. i don’t have to say it again.[3]
reference to a previous legal threat to the mother to raise issues of sex happening in her [business] and her failure to declare cash payments as income. i was unhappy [ms rabbani] had refused to acknowledge the money that i had contributed to her business, and made these threats to her as a consequence.[4]
if i see any more photos of my kids on facebook you will see me personally knocking on your door.[5]
knocking on your door and asking your wife in what right she has used my kids photos is not a threat mate.[6]
are you inside the [business premises]? are you safe? call me before i break the door. i wanna check that everyone is safe.[7]
..on the way to your sister’s house to check about my kids. are they safe? why no one is not answering my calls.[8]
you know what’s gonna [sic] happen after that, you know. i told you last time what’s gonna [sic] happen. i don’t have to say it again and again and again. i told you last time what’s gonna [sic] happen.
“i’m gunna [sic] tell everyone on facebook that what’s been happening in your business”, stuff like that. or like, “wait and see what gunna is [sic] happen. if we’re gunna [sic] end up divorced because of the business, see what’s gunna [sic] happen for you.”
by the above comments the father meant he would take the mother to court and destroy her business.
senior constable [t]: in 2019, did you ever say anything relating to, or that might’ve be construed, “if you take the kids from me, i’m going to kill you then myself?” father: no.... i tell you how she takes it, for example, when we talk, forget the argument, when we talk, for example, and i say to her “i would sacrifice the whole world for my kids.” “ah, are you gunna [sic] sacrifice me, or uh [sic], are you gunna [sic] kill me?” mate, it’s an expression. or, for example, “i would burn the whole world for my kids.” “are you gunna [sic] burn me alive, are you gunna [sic] kill me?” senior constable [t]: and that’s...[the] wording that you’ve used with her?.... father: ....yeah.....also, for example, i, um, i’ll tell her, for example, “i’ll give myself for my kids.” “are you gunna [sic] kill yourself?” mate, it’s only an expression.
“i know you're at your, i know you're at your dad's house and your mum is at [ms r]'s. i just came back from your sister’s house. the childish drama you've all done is totally unacceptable. you took my kids and ran away, which i will deal with when you come back. you're not gunna [sic] stay at your dad's forever. at the end of the day, you are coming back home. can you imagined [sic] i've done that to you and what will your reaction be? but i will never do that for my kids, my kids are priority in my life and i will do everything to protect them. if you just answered my calls, you wouldn't put yourself in this situation, i just wanted to know that the kids are safe...
senior constable [t]: mate, that, that kind, the, the message you’ve sent, you can’t be sending those type of messages. father: why? senior constable [t]: because you’ve coerced her into contacting you. you’ve...shown her a photo...you’ve threatened her in a way, “if you don’t call me, i’m posting this up.” father: yeah. senior constable [t] ok. father: but what’s the difference between this and when i just told you, when we have an argument i say to her.... “if you go for divorce, i wanna [sic] go after your business.”
charge of breaching the avo and a further criminal charge of stalking/intimidation of 25 september 2020
father: can you send [ms rabbani] a message from me? [ms w]: depends what it is, you shouldn’t be sending her messages. father: can you do it or not, otherwise i’ll find another way. look at this, what is it i am holding? this is a q’aran, yea? [sic] [ms w]: yea? [sic] father: i’ve sworn on it three times, the kids either live under my rules, or they don’t live at all. you tell [ms rabbani] to fix this and use her brain properly. my children will not live as christians or atheists. [ms w]: you’re saying you’re going to kill your kids? do you hear what you are saying? father: what would you do, if you were in my position? [ms w]: i need to go. father: can you give her the message or not? i will find another way unless you do it. [ms w]: fine i’ll give her the message.
the father’s response to the balance of the mother’s allegations
although we argued frequently, there was never physical violence.
threats to harm
physical assaults and property damage
verbal abuse and denigration
controlling behaviour
i am not going to stay married to you, you’re not a good wife. i will take the children, you are not fit to be their mother. i should have married a [country p] girl. it’s for your own good i need to know where you are all the time, to make sure that you are safe.
you are a slut! you can’t have the car anymore. if you want to go anywhere, get groceries, take the kids to school – then you can walk or get public transport.
misogynistic views
that’s what every man should do. the government needs to understand what happens when it’s always the woman’s way.[9]
this is what should happen, the law is for all the women, nothing for the men. every man should do this.[10]
harm to children
further findings as to family violence
other risk issues
mental health issues
the mother’s business premises
father: when i found out this place was inappropriate for the kids i didn’t want her to continue. counsel for the mother: when you say inappropriate – can you elaborate? father: it’s a place for sex between adults after hours – i didn’t know that before. there are male neighbours who come in and out, the kids are probably full or half naked. i didn’t want my kids in this place, not my kids or any kids.
the additional considerations
the extent to which the parents have taken the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues or spend time or communicate with the children
ms abdelraheem: they [[d contact centre]] sent you an email on 21 september 2021 saying that one of the conditions of you engaging or spending supervised time through their service was that you had to be double vaccinated against covid, and you informed them that you had your first shot and that you were getting your second shot in october? father: that’s right. ms abdelraheem: when did you get your second shot of the covid vaccination? father: i can’t remember the date. ms abdelraheem: you got the second shot through [ag medical centre]? father: yes. ms abdelraheem: you understand that a subpoena was issued to that surgery to produce your records? were you aware that a subpoena was issued? father: i didn’t know that. ms abdelraheem: i put to you that there was a subpoena issues to [ag medical centre]. father: okay. ms abdelraheem: i want you to read the bottom of the record where it says immunisations. it says you got your first shot in august 2021? father: yes. ms abdelraheem: and it shows you when you received your second shot? father: that’s right. ms abdelraheem: can you read the date out loud? father: 21 september 2021. ms abdelraheem: i would like to clarify that this is your patient health summary from the [ag medical centre]? father: yes. ms abdelraheem: and that it is true and correct to your knowledge? father: yes. ms abdelraheem: so why then, would you send an email to [d contact centre] on 21 september 2021 saying you are to receive your second shot of the vaccination the month after in october? father: i had to take it a week earlier to come back to work. i wasn’t allowed at work until i got my second shot. hh: ms abdelraheem’s question was – why would you email [d contact centre] saying you hadn’t had your second vaccination shot when it appears that you’d had it on the same day that you sent that email? father: because it was supposed to be in october. but i had it a week before. i had to have it a week before. ms abdelraheem: that is the explanation you’re going to provide? father: yes.
ms abdelraheem: at paragraph 9 of your affidavit sworn on 16 june 2022 you said that you mentally struggle with the idea of spending time with the children under supervision? father: yes. ms abdelraheem: why did you mentally struggle with the idea of being supervised? father: because i think they’re my kids, why would i get someone to supervise me with my kids? i’m not going to hurt my kids (emphasis added). ms abdelraheem: this is despite you consenting to an order for supervision in 2020? father: yes.
counsel for the icl: and while it was covid, you couldn’t see the children in person? father: that’s right counsel for the icl: so you decided it wasn’t worth having s telephone or video face to face with them, did you? father: it’s not that it’s not worth, but i would prefer to wait a bit and see them face to face and not on a video call. counsel for the icl: but that was the situation then. covid lockdowns were in place, this was the kind of contact you could have with your children and you said no? father: that’s right. because i don’t want to see my kids face to face after two and a half years and not hug them.
mr reeves: and your lawyer is charging you to deal with your matter isn’t he? father: correct. mr reeves: so did it occur to you that it might be a good use of the funds that you clearly have because you can pay your lawyer, to use those funds to see your children. father: i couldn’t afford to pay the lawyer and see the children at the same time. mr reeves: well i suggest to you, the children are you world, wouldn’t you prioritise seeing them at least once or twice? father: that’s right. mr reeves: did you prioritise them? father: no, not yet because i didn’t have the money. i couldn’t afford to pay the lawyer and see the kids at the same time. mr reeves: and you chose to pay the lawyer? father: i have to. otherwise, how am i going to get the order to see my kids? mr reeves: you already had an order to see the other, i suggest to you. so you’ve just said how could i get the order to see my kids when in fact you already had an order to see your children? father: that’s right.
the capacity of each parent to provide for the children’s needs and responsibilities of parenthood demonstrated by the parents
...expressed concern for hers and [the] children’s physical and psychological safety in light of [mr rabbani]’s alleged behaviours. she appeared protective of, and sensitive to the children’s needs, with the capacity to reflect upon herself as a separate entity to the children.   is an old soul so she is mature but i still worry at nine years old that it is not appropriate to tell her. at some stage i will need to have the conversation.
do you love me? [do you love] nanny, but you don’t love mummy do you. once [x] agreed to his statement, he said, ‘let’s go to the markets and get a new mummy, she is yucky’ to which [mr rabbani] and [x] laughed together.
maternal grandmother: i heard him say to [x], who do you love more? me? or mummy? and she wouldn’t answer. and he would say you love daddy more don’t you. do you love mummy more, or do you love nanny more? and [x] would say nanny because she was told, “you don’t love mummy. we are going to go to the markets, we’re going to put her in a box, and we’re going to find a new mum.” mr reeves: you say that the father and the child were upstairs and that you could hear this clearly? maternal grandmother: yes.
the mother “doesn’t have time for the kids. i told her this is not a life, i am working you don’t have to work... she said she loves working. i told her [she is] destroying the family.” the mother requested a divorce from the father and “i would not divorce her [so] she went to the police.... she started this drama. every woman goes to the police.” he is seeking equal time with the children or alternatively as much time as he can have with them as he and the mother: “have the right to have the children 50 per cent of the time.”
“..are going to come back, one day i will see them i am not worried. she took my kids off me, the kids will leave her in the future 100 percent, what goes around comes around. she took them off my by oppression.” when [mr rabbani] was asked how he would feel if the children no longer had a relationship with [ms rabbani], he said, “of course i would not be happy if they stopped seeing their mother. they may tell me that i deprived them of seeing their mother. i don’t want them to blame me. they will understand then what’s going on. they will blame their mother because she deprived them from seeing me.”
defensive, critical and argumentative at times during the assessment process....his presentation remained consistent in both the child inclusive conference memorandum to court and family report assessments, and suggests that his capacity to reflect upon his derogatory comments will likely have on the children, if he is to spend time with them, is limited.
any views expressed by the children
the nature of the children’s relationship with the parents and other significant persons
with regards to the children’s relationship with [mr rabbani], it would appear that both [x] and [y] are ambivalent about spending time with [mr rabbani], and [z] appears to have no memory of him at all. this is likely due to [z]’s age at the time of separation.
the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled their obligations to maintain the children
the likely effect of any changes in the children’s circumstances
the practical difficulty and expense of the children spending time with the father
any other relevant fact or circumstance
discussion and determination
whether the resumption of equal shared parental responsibility is rebutted and orders be made granting the mother sole parental responsibility.
whether the children are at an unacceptable risk of harm in the father’s care
being subjected to coercive and controlling family violence is known to have detrimental impacts on children, including their psychological wellbeing and physical safety. family violence of this type is also associated with parenting deficits in the perpetrating parent, including inappropriate use of authority and/or coercive discipline methods that escalate to physical abuse, a limited capacity to separate the children’s needs from the perpetrator’s own needs, and a low tolerance for age appropriate behaviours.
...suffer insecurity, fear, unhappiness, anxiety and hypervigilance from witnessing abusive behaviour of a parent. such effects present a threat to their emotional development. probably the worst danger to children is the role model that a violent parent provides which can lead to children themselves coming to suffer the serious social disability of using violence in their dealings with other people including those they love. such a disability can destroy the most intimate relationships and bring the person into conflict with other people, the police and the law...   rabbani] described family violence across multiple domains, which is most consistent with coercive and controlling violence, which pose a risk of lethality and significant harm. this type of family violence is generally characterised by a pattern of power and control by one partner over another, for the purposes of creating fear of, and submission to the perpetrator through the use of threats, continued verbal and emotional abuse, monitoring behaviours and actual harm. the subsequent effects on the victim can also vary depending on the longevity and types of abuse, in addition to the intensity of the abuse inflicted by the perpetrator.[15]
if [ms rabbani]’s allegations regarding family violence are found to have veracity, it raises concerns that [mr rabbani] will continue to act to exercise power and control over [ms rabbani] in parenting arrangements, and may take revenge upon [ms rabbani] for divorcing him by killing the children.[16] ...in the instance that [ms rabbani]’s account has substance, then the children spending time with [mr rabbani] would likely be to their detriment, and potentially result in the children being exposed to further parental conflict and/or family violence, psychological and physical abuse. if this were to occur, it is likely to adversely affect their mental and physical health. further to this, if [ms rabbani]’s allegations regarding [mr rabbani] threatening to harm the children and/or kill the children has substance, an order providing for the children to spend time with [mr rabbani] may result in injury and/or death.[17]
.. apart from those matters heard in the local court in 2020 there is no other matter that would cause the court any great concern. there is no allegation of physical violence between the father and the mother. apart from one allegation in about 2017, there is no allegation of physical assaults directed towards the children.
mr reeves: when you were speaking, have you ever said to the mother “i would burn the whole world for my kids?” father: yes. mr reeves: you said that? father: yes. mr reeves: did you say it around the time of this story on the news [the hannah baxter story]? father: no mr reeves: did you say it subsequent to hearing that story? father: no. that’s something that i usually say. mr reeves: so you usually say, i would burn the whole world for my kids? father: yes it just means i can sacrifice everything for my kids, that’s what i mean. mr reeves: what do you mean by sacrifice? father: i just translate it from arabic to english, because this is what we say in arabic. mr reeves: but you understand the word sacrifice can often refer to killing. father: yeah, but i don’t mean that. and i just mentioned to you that i translate everything from arabic to english mr reeves: so you don’t mean to sacrifice is to kill, and when you say ‘to burn the whole world’ you don’t mean to literally burn the whole world, and you don’t mean to literally burn your children and your ex-wife? father: 100 per cent. i don’t mean that. mr reeves: but you’re saying it at around the time of this actually happening. father: this is something that i always used to say. i can say it right now. that i sacrifice – not killing – that i can sacrifice everything for my kids - that means i put my kids first and the whole world comes after that. mr reeves: so you understand it that way but you can’t be sure the mother understands it that way, can you? father: english is not my first language. so when i say something and someone didn’t understand it, they need to ask what i mean. they can’t just take it they way they want. if she doesn’t understand me they should ask me mr reeves: so after hearing about the baxter family – the father who burnt his children – did you stop using the words “i will burn the whole world?” father: it’s not stop. this is something that i usually say. if i knew any word besides this, i would use the other word. ... mr reeves: in your answer to q151 in that transcript from may 2020, you understood that she thought that sacrifice meant to kill. father: yes. mr reeves: and you said “mate it’s an expression” which you’re saying it is father: that’s right. mr reeves: and example “i would burn the whole world for my kids – and the mother would ask you are you going to burn me alive? are you going to kill me?” so you understood, that she thought that, and you kept saying it. father: if the first time she didn’t understand [sic] what i mean, and i keep explaining it to her, and i said that the next time, she should know that i don’t mean what she thinks.
i verily believe that would cause more harm to the children psychologically, if [mr rabbani] simply decided when and how he would have contact with the children, despite court orders, and have no regard for the orders or the children’s best interests.[19]   rabbani] stated that, if the court makes orders that [ms rabbani] consider unfavourable “he won’t be happy [and] we might have to go away for a few days. i’m scared, as he breached [the advo] once.”
scared he will hurt them to get back at me, or he will take them and i won’t see them again.
mother: i’m scared of the mental side, the little things which to someone else seem like he’s taking an interest. i’m worried that with [d contact centre] you can do outside in a park, how do i know he doesn’t have someone there to take the kids? i have fears he will try and hurt them so i won’t have them. mr cairns: your concern is more about the father wanting to harm you through the children? mother: no i’m scared he’s going to hurt them because he’s said it.
whether specific orders need to be m‑‑ade in regard to the obtaining passports and whether the children should be removed from the airport watchlist and be permitted to travel
whether the mother of children’s safety is at risk and what if any other protective orders should be in place to ensure the safety of the children.
conclusion
associate: dated: 27 march 2023
dated: 27 march 2023
[1] family report, paragraph 27. [2] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 31. [3] father’s affidavit, paragraph 45. [4] father’s affidavit, paragraph 45. [5] father’s affidavit, paragraph 40. [6] father’s affidavit, annexure a. [7] father’s affidavit, annexure b. [8] father’s affidavit, annexure b. [9] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 85. [10] affidavit of ms ad, paragraph 34. [11] affidavit of ms ad, paragraph 34.[12] mother’s affidavit, paragraph 112. [13] affidavit of ms ad, paragraph 35. [14] father’s affidavit, paragraph 77. [15] family report, paragraph 104. [16] family report, paragraph 106. [17] family report, paragraph 110. [18] family report, paragraph 50.[19] mother’s affidavit paragraph 64.