last updated: 23 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
chun & zheng [2023] fedcfamc2f 377
orders
the court orders that:
the b street, suburb c property  the applicant shall pay all mortgage repayments, apportionable taxes and outgoings in relation to the b street, suburb c property including any bills and/or utilities as they fall due, and (b) the applicant shall have the sole use and occupancy of the b street, suburb c property.   the applicant shall have the sole use and occupancy of the b street, suburb c property.   firstly, to pay all costs, commissions, and expenses in relation to the sale of the b street, suburb c property, (b) secondly, to discharge the mortgage secured over the b street, suburb c property in favour of the commonwealth bank of australia (mortgage dealing: ...), (c) thirdly, to pay all balance remaining to the applicant.   secondly, to discharge the mortgage secured over the b street, suburb c property in favour of the commonwealth bank of australia (mortgage dealing: ...), (c) thirdly, to pay all balance remaining to the applicant.   thirdly, to pay all balance remaining to the applicant.
commonwealth bank offset account ending in #...42
transfer of d share portfolio account #...15
commonwealth bank cdia account #...43
settlement payment  firstly, to pay all costs, commissions, and expenses in relation to the sale of the e street, suburb f property, (b) secondly, to discharge the mortgage secured over the e street, suburb f property. (c) thirdly, pay the applicant the settlement payment plus penalty interest calculated from the date of the default, and (d) fourthly, pay all balance remaining to the respondent.   secondly, to discharge the mortgage secured over the e street, suburb f property. (c) thirdly, pay the applicant the settlement payment plus penalty interest calculated from the date of the default, and (d) fourthly, pay all balance remaining to the respondent.   thirdly, pay the applicant the settlement payment plus penalty interest calculated from the date of the default, and (d) fourthly, pay all balance remaining to the respondent.   fourthly, pay all balance remaining to the respondent.
other   any bank accounts and balances held in her name, (b) any shares held in her name, (c) her personal effects and chattels in her current possession, and (d) her superannuation entitlement.   any shares held in her name, (c) her personal effects and chattels in her current possession, and (d) her superannuation entitlement.   her personal effects and chattels in her current possession, and (d) her superannuation entitlement.   her superannuation entitlement.   the e street, suburb f property, (b) his motor vehicle 1, (c) his motor vehicle 2, (d) any bank accounts and balances held in his name, (e) his company g shares portfolio in his name, (f) his personal effects and chattels already in his possession, and (g) his superannuation entitlement.   his motor vehicle 1, (c) his motor vehicle 2, (d) any bank accounts and balances held in his name, (e) his company g shares portfolio in his name, (f) his personal effects and chattels already in his possession, and (g) his superannuation entitlement.   his motor vehicle 2, (d) any bank accounts and balances held in his name, (e) his company g shares portfolio in his name, (f) his personal effects and chattels already in his possession, and (g) his superannuation entitlement.   any bank accounts and balances held in his name, (e) his company g shares portfolio in his name, (f) his personal effects and chattels already in his possession, and (g) his superannuation entitlement.   his company g shares portfolio in his name, (f) his personal effects and chattels already in his possession, and (g) his superannuation entitlement.   his personal effects and chattels already in his possession, and (g) his superannuation entitlement.   his superannuation entitlement.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property (including choses-in-action) in their name or possession as at the date of these orders, (b) insurance policies remained the sole property of the beneficiary named thereon, (c) each party be solely liable for an indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies remained the sole property of the beneficiary named thereon, (c) each party be solely liable for an indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party be solely liable for an indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, and (d) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
reasons for judgment(delivered ex tempore, revised from transcript)
judge blake
the application to proceed on an undefended basis
principles  the expression “undefended” is not defined, or otherwise explained, in the rules. however the explanatory guide to the rules (which is expressly stated not to be part of the rules) explains the term “undefended basis” in the following way:
...the court may order that a hearing or trial may proceed, because of the respondent’s failure to comply with a rule or order, as if a response has not been filed. the court may make orders set out in the application on being satisfied by evidence that the orders should be made.   for the purposes of rule 10.27, a respondent is in default if the respondent fails to: (a) give an address for service before the time for the respondent to give an address has expired, or (b) file a response before the time for the respondent to file a response has expired, or (c) comply with an order of the court in the proceeding, or (d) file and serve a document required under these rules, or (e) produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or   give an address for service before the time for the respondent to give an address has expired, or (b) file a response before the time for the respondent to file a response has expired, or (c) comply with an order of the court in the proceeding, or (d) file and serve a document required under these rules, or (e) produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or   file a response before the time for the respondent to file a response has expired, or (c) comply with an order of the court in the proceeding, or (d) file and serve a document required under these rules, or (e) produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or   comply with an order of the court in the proceeding, or (d) file and serve a document required under these rules, or (e) produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or   file and serve a document required under these rules, or (e) produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or   produce a document as required by division 6.2.2, or (f) do any act required to be done by these rules, or   do any act required to be done by these rules, or   defend the proceeding with due diligence, or (h) prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.   prosecute with due diligence any application the respondent has made in the proceeding.  ] ...the court has a discretion as to how to conduct a hearing when a case is undefended. that this is so has been confirmed in earlier cases. i note that in the decision of the full court of the family court of australia in zane & allan [2008] famcafc 115 – the court did not cavil with the comments of the trial judge (le poer trench j) concerning the “wide discretion to be exercised by the trial judge” in relation to, amongst other things, the involvement of the defaulting party in an undefended hearing. it was noted by le poer trench j and (seemingly supported by the full court) that the discretion “must be tempered with regard to procedural fairness, natural justice and the requirement to do justice to all of the parties.”
consideration  that he had emailed my associate documents he wanted to rely on last week. as i understand it, those documents were emailed to my chambers on 23 march 2023, (b) the documents he emailed on 23 march 2023 included the initial affidavit that he filed in the proceedings, (c) that he wanted, today, to make sure that these documents and potentially others were filed properly and given to the other side, and (d) that given this matter had been set down for three days, there was no reason effectively, why the parties could not return tomorrow to run their respective cases.   the documents he emailed on 23 march 2023 included the initial affidavit that he filed in the proceedings, (c) that he wanted, today, to make sure that these documents and potentially others were filed properly and given to the other side, and (d) that given this matter had been set down for three days, there was no reason effectively, why the parties could not return tomorrow to run their respective cases.   that he wanted, today, to make sure that these documents and potentially others were filed properly and given to the other side, and (d) that given this matter had been set down for three days, there was no reason effectively, why the parties could not return tomorrow to run their respective cases.   that given this matter had been set down for three days, there was no reason effectively, why the parties could not return tomorrow to run their respective cases.
relevant priciples
should an order be made altering the property interests of the parties?
the assets and liabilities of the parties
contributions
adjustments under section 75(2) of the act
associate: dated: 4 april 2023
dated: 4 april 2023