last updated: 19 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
dyer & kaeser [2023] fedcfamc2f 452
orders
the court orders that:
cash payment  the property shall be listed for sale by private treaty with such real estate agent as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement within fourteen (14) days from the date of these orders, the real estate agent will be as nominated by the then chief executive officer of the real estate institute of queensland at the request of the parties or either of them (b) the list price of the property shall be an amount as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement within fourteen (14) days, the list price will be as nominated by the real estate agent. (c) the sale price of the property shall be such amount as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement, any offer to buy the property that is at least 80% of the list price shall be accepted by the parties as the sale price. (d) the applicant is to co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent, and ensuring that the property is clean, neat and in good order at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer. (e) that upon agreement being reached for sale of the property, the applicant shall execute the contract of sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale of the property including all transfer documents forthwith upon its submission to him by the agent or his solicitor. (f) the contract of sale shall provide for completion within thirty (30) days after the date of the contract. (g) the proceeds of sale of the property shall be paid in the following manner and priority: (i) to discharge the mortgage no. ... to d bank. (ii) payment of the agent's commission and advertising or other expenses, if any, payable upon the sale. (iii) payment of any legal costs and outlays relating to the sale. (iv) the balance to be divided: 57.5% to the respondent 42.5% to the applicant.   the list price of the property shall be an amount as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement within fourteen (14) days, the list price will be as nominated by the real estate agent. (c) the sale price of the property shall be such amount as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement, any offer to buy the property that is at least 80% of the list price shall be accepted by the parties as the sale price. (d) the applicant is to co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent, and ensuring that the property is clean, neat and in good order at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer. (e) that upon agreement being reached for sale of the property, the applicant shall execute the contract of sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale of the property including all transfer documents forthwith upon its submission to him by the agent or his solicitor. (f) the contract of sale shall provide for completion within thirty (30) days after the date of the contract. (g) the proceeds of sale of the property shall be paid in the following manner and priority: (i) to discharge the mortgage no. ... to d bank. (ii) payment of the agent's commission and advertising or other expenses, if any, payable upon the sale. (iii) payment of any legal costs and outlays relating to the sale. (iv) the balance to be divided: 57.5% to the respondent 42.5% to the applicant.   the sale price of the property shall be such amount as is agreed between the parties and failing agreement, any offer to buy the property that is at least 80% of the list price shall be accepted by the parties as the sale price. (d) the applicant is to co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent, and ensuring that the property is clean, neat and in good order at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer. (e) that upon agreement being reached for sale of the property, the applicant shall execute the contract of sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale of the property including all transfer documents forthwith upon its submission to him by the agent or his solicitor. (f) the contract of sale shall provide for completion within thirty (30) days after the date of the contract. (g) the proceeds of sale of the property shall be paid in the following manner and priority: (i) to discharge the mortgage no. ... to d bank. (ii) payment of the agent's commission and advertising or other expenses, if any, payable upon the sale. (iii) payment of any legal costs and outlays relating to the sale. (iv) the balance to be divided: 57.5% to the respondent 42.5% to the applicant.   the applicant is to co-operate in every way with the real estate agent in relation to the marketing of the property for sale including making the keys readily available, allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the agent, and ensuring that the property is clean, neat and in good order at the time of inspection by any prospective buyer. (e) that upon agreement being reached for sale of the property, the applicant shall execute the contract of sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale of the property including all transfer documents forthwith upon its submission to him by the agent or his solicitor. (f) the contract of sale shall provide for completion within thirty (30) days after the date of the contract. (g) the proceeds of sale of the property shall be paid in the following manner and priority: (i) to discharge the mortgage no. ... to d bank. (ii) payment of the agent's commission and advertising or other expenses, if any, payable upon the sale. (iii) payment of any legal costs and outlays relating to the sale. (iv) the balance to be divided: 57.5% to the respondent 42.5% to the applicant.   that upon agreement being reached for sale of the property, the applicant shall execute the contract of sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale of the property including all transfer documents forthwith upon its submission to him by the agent or his solicitor. (f) the contract of sale shall provide for completion within thirty (30) days after the date of the contract. (g) the proceeds of sale of the property shall be paid in the following manner and priority: (i) to discharge the mortgage no. ... to d bank. (ii) payment of the agent's commission and advertising or other expenses, if any, payable upon the sale. (iii) payment of any legal costs and outlays relating to the sale. (iv) the balance to be divided: 57.5% to the respondent 42.5% to the applicant.   the contract of sale shall provide for completion within thirty (30) days after the date of the contract. (g) the proceeds of sale of the property shall be paid in the following manner and priority: (i) to discharge the mortgage no. ... to d bank. (ii) payment of the agent's commission and advertising or other expenses, if any, payable upon the sale. (iii) payment of any legal costs and outlays relating to the sale. (iv) the balance to be divided: 57.5% to the respondent 42.5% to the applicant.   the proceeds of sale of the property shall be paid in the following manner and priority: (i) to discharge the mortgage no. ... to d bank. (ii) payment of the agent's commission and advertising or other expenses, if any, payable upon the sale. (iii) payment of any legal costs and outlays relating to the sale. (iv) the balance to be divided: 57.5% to the respondent 42.5% to the applicant.   to discharge the mortgage no. ... to d bank. (ii) payment of the agent's commission and advertising or other expenses, if any, payable upon the sale. (iii) payment of any legal costs and outlays relating to the sale. (iv) the balance to be divided: 57.5% to the respondent 42.5% to the applicant.  ) payment of the agent's commission and advertising or other expenses, if any, payable upon the sale. (iii) payment of any legal costs and outlays relating to the sale. (iv) the balance to be divided: 57.5% to the respondent 42.5% to the applicant.  i) payment of any legal costs and outlays relating to the sale. (iv) the balance to be divided: 57.5% to the respondent 42.5% to the applicant.  ) the balance to be divided: 57.5% to the respondent 42.5% to the applicant.
other  all personal property now in their respective possession or control. (b) all shares, debentures, units in unit trusts, bank, building society or credit union accounts standing in their sole name respectively. (c) all interests in life insurance policies and superannuation funds standing in their sole name respectively.   all shares, debentures, units in unit trusts, bank, building society or credit union accounts standing in their sole name respectively. (c) all interests in life insurance policies and superannuation funds standing in their sole name respectively.   all interests in life insurance policies and superannuation funds standing in their sole name respectively.
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge young
$150,000 withdraw.
the balance sheet
contributions
section 90sf(3)
associate: dated: 29 march 2023
dated: 29 march 2023