last updated: 15 may 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
maynard & frye [2023] fedcfamc2f 354
orders
the court orders that:  attending at or being within 100 metres of the ordinary place of residence of ms maynard, and (b) attending at or being within 100 metres of any place of employment of ms maynard.   attending at or being within 100 metres of any place of employment of ms maynard.   attending at or being within 100 metres of the ordinary place of residence of the children, x born 2006, and y born 2012, and (b) attending at or being within 100 metres of any school, place of employment, or educational institution attended by the children, x born 2006 and y born 2012.   attending at or being within 100 metres of any school, place of employment, or educational institution attended by the children, x born 2006 and y born 2012.
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge obradovic:
issues for determination  whether the children are at an unacceptable risk of harm when in the care of the father even if supervised, (b) whether the benefit of a meaningful relationship with her father outweighs the risks for y, and (c) whether it is in the best interest of the children to make the restraints as sought by the mother and the icl.   whether the benefit of a meaningful relationship with her father outweighs the risks for y, and (c) whether it is in the best interest of the children to make the restraints as sought by the mother and the icl.   whether it is in the best interest of the children to make the restraints as sought by the mother and the icl.
procedural history
relevant legal principles
the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion... the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interests, which entails an exercise of discretion. that discretionary judgment is influenced by the various material considerations enumerated within s 60cc of the act, of which the evidence-based finding made about the existence of any unacceptable risk of harm is but one.[9]
discussion
relevant facts  is a muslim. since 4 years old she started to pray with her mother. [x] attends islamic class in school since year 1... [the mother] is a muslim, she converted to islam before we got married. both children are muslim according to the family faith.
prior to separation  in 2014 and 2015, the mother pulled x’s hair multiple times, (b) in or about “june/august 2015” the mother screamed at x, pulled her hair and hit her with a wooden spoon and a metal spatula, (c) in june 2015, the mother hit x with a metal flat knife, (d) in august and december 2015, the mother hit x several times, and (e) in january 2016, the mother hit x multiple times.   in or about “june/august 2015” the mother screamed at x, pulled her hair and hit her with a wooden spoon and a metal spatula, (c) in june 2015, the mother hit x with a metal flat knife, (d) in august and december 2015, the mother hit x several times, and (e) in january 2016, the mother hit x multiple times.   in june 2015, the mother hit x with a metal flat knife, (d) in august and december 2015, the mother hit x several times, and (e) in january 2016, the mother hit x multiple times.   in august and december 2015, the mother hit x several times, and (e) in january 2016, the mother hit x multiple times.   in january 2016, the mother hit x multiple times.
....signed an agreement (written by her sister [ms g] and in my presence at my home) that [x] and [y] are mulsim and the mother will not take the children to any christian activity in the mother’s care.   the mother’s sister did not like the father because of his religion and culture, (b) he told the mother in 2001 that he could not have children with or get married to the mother because his “religion, culture and permanent resident [sic]”, (c) the mother fell pregnant secretly with x so that she could give the baby to her sister to restore their relationship, and (d) as a country c man it is very hard to look after children because in his culture it is the mother who would perform that role.   he told the mother in 2001 that he could not have children with or get married to the mother because his “religion, culture and permanent resident [sic]”, (c) the mother fell pregnant secretly with x so that she could give the baby to her sister to restore their relationship, and (d) as a country c man it is very hard to look after children because in his culture it is the mother who would perform that role.   the mother fell pregnant secretly with x so that she could give the baby to her sister to restore their relationship, and (d) as a country c man it is very hard to look after children because in his culture it is the mother who would perform that role.   as a country c man it is very hard to look after children because in his culture it is the mother who would perform that role.
after separation
....could not take [the mother’s] bouts of violence any longer and we separated on 15 january 2016. [the mother] moved out of the house and moved in with her sister [ms g] at [suburb h]. the children stayed at their mother’s house after our separation for 2 days a week for 8 weeks only. ..... from [...] january 2016 to [...] march 2016 for 8 weeks the children stayed with [the mother] for 2 nights a week in [suburb h]. i was concerned about [the mother’s] bouts of rage against the children. she was violent towards the children in the past when we lived together...... the children have always been happy and healthier with me...... i never slept in another person’s house in my life, unlike [the mother] who stayed overnight at her boyfriend’s house.”   department of family and community services in early 2016, (b) nsw police on three dates in early 2016 and on a date in late 2016, (c) the icl on 20 april 2018, 22 june 2018, 25 july 2018 and 31 october 2018, (d) family consultant on 11 september 2018, and (e) nsw police in late 2020 (the consequences of which are discussed further below).   nsw police on three dates in early 2016 and on a date in late 2016, (c) the icl on 20 april 2018, 22 june 2018, 25 july 2018 and 31 october 2018, (d) family consultant on 11 september 2018, and (e) nsw police in late 2020 (the consequences of which are discussed further below).   the icl on 20 april 2018, 22 june 2018, 25 july 2018 and 31 october 2018, (d) family consultant on 11 september 2018, and (e) nsw police in late 2020 (the consequences of which are discussed further below).   family consultant on 11 september 2018, and (e) nsw police in late 2020 (the consequences of which are discussed further below).   nsw police in late 2020 (the consequences of which are discussed further below).
“mum wanted to cut all my hair, cut it into small pieces as i didn’t cut my nails.” “mum hit me, when i did not shower fast.” “mum pulled my hair”. “we didn’t sleep until 1am”
i would have given the kids to you if you were a muslim, you will never get custody, otherwise there will be bloodshed.   said to me: “mum and [the mother’s sister] pushed us to church to change my name.”
and that:
the children’s religion is islam. [the mother] wanted to change their religion to christianity and to change [x’s] name to [w].
2019 incident  told dad that i said i want him to go back to his country, then dad threatened me with [a weapon], i was crying and screaming help help. dad was angry with me when i was screaming. he hit me with his hand on my shoulder and asked why i said that about him.   the father must not approach the school or childcare of the children, (b) the father must not go within 200 metres of any place that the mother or children live or work, and (c) the father must not go within 200 metres of k school, j school or the mother’s residence.   the father must not go within 200 metres of any place that the mother or children live or work, and (c) the father must not go within 200 metres of k school, j school or the mother’s residence.   the father must not go within 200 metres of k school, j school or the mother’s residence.  ] when [ms maynard] was asked about the incident in [early] 2019, she reported that [x] “thought she was going to die” when [mr frye] threatened her with [a weapon] and identified, when asked, that this incident has had a “really massive effect” on [x] and was “really, really traumatic to her.”....  ] .... [x] clarified that, while spending time with [mr frye], he “got mad at me for saying something” about wanting him to “go back to his country” and he entered her bedroom, where she was sitting, and threatened her with [a weapon]. [x] reported that “i was screaming”, “i started crying”, and that she “felt like i was about to die at that moment” due to [mr frye] moving the [weapon] back and forth close to her face and making threats to kill her and “the whole [maynard] family” and comments that she was turning evil like your mother” ....... [26] [x] described ongoing difficulties following [mr frye] threatening her with an [...] and subsequently approaching her, including nightmares about “my dad trying to chase me, chase after me” and concerns that “i’m being followed” when outside school and when out with her friends....  ] [y] confirmed that she is not spending time with [mr frye] and said that this is because “he scares me a lot and he frightened me”. she reported that, on one occasion, she was watching television when [mr frye] hid the [weapon] behind his back and was then “putting the [weapon] up on [x]”. she stated that she did not really hear that much of the incident but reported [mr frye] was “shouting” at [x], including telling [x] “i want to kill you with this [weapon]”. [y] said that, when [mr frye] threatened [x] with [a weapon], she felt “really scared and bad for my sister because i don’t want my sister to die” and said that she was “shaking” while sitting on the couch while [mr frye] was threatening [x]. [y] confirmed that she had thought [x] would die during this incident “because [mr frye] was, like, holding the [weapon]” and she is aware that “some people kill people with the [weapon]”.
why you tell lie that i want to go to [country c] ..... next time you tell that one i will kill you and i will kill your mother.   he was convicted of an offence without any evidence supporting the conviction. when it was pointed out to the father that his daughter, x, had given evidence against him in the criminal trial, the father clarified that there was no independent evidence to support his conviction, (b) x lied about the incident, (c) the mother had made x lie about the incident, (d) he had never before told anyone that he did threaten x, because he did not use a weapon and (e) x would not have been scared by the threat because she would not have taken it seriously, but that it was his intention to scare x when he made the threat.   x lied about the incident, (c) the mother had made x lie about the incident, (d) he had never before told anyone that he did threaten x, because he did not use a weapon and (e) x would not have been scared by the threat because she would not have taken it seriously, but that it was his intention to scare x when he made the threat.   the mother had made x lie about the incident, (d) he had never before told anyone that he did threaten x, because he did not use a weapon and (e) x would not have been scared by the threat because she would not have taken it seriously, but that it was his intention to scare x when he made the threat.   he had never before told anyone that he did threaten x, because he did not use a weapon and (e) x would not have been scared by the threat because she would not have taken it seriously, but that it was his intention to scare x when he made the threat.   x would not have been scared by the threat because she would not have taken it seriously, but that it was his intention to scare x when he made the threat.
after the 2019 incident  that in mid-2015, the mother committed common assault and intimidation offences by, inter alia, threatening x with a metal spatula, engaging in a scuffle with x and pulling her hair, (b) that on the same date, the mother committed common assault and intimidation offences by, inter alia, holding her hand out towards x, hitting x twice in her leg area with a towel, threatening x with a metal spatula and pulling x’s towel off her causing her to fall to the ground, (c) that in mid-2016, the mother committed common assault and intimidation offences by, inter alia, waving a wooden spoon towards x and striking her on the leg and the hand, and (d) that on the same date, the mother committed the offence of common assault by hitting x with a plastic ruler on her shoulder and arm and by subsequently holding x.   that on the same date, the mother committed common assault and intimidation offences by, inter alia, holding her hand out towards x, hitting x twice in her leg area with a towel, threatening x with a metal spatula and pulling x’s towel off her causing her to fall to the ground, (c) that in mid-2016, the mother committed common assault and intimidation offences by, inter alia, waving a wooden spoon towards x and striking her on the leg and the hand, and (d) that on the same date, the mother committed the offence of common assault by hitting x with a plastic ruler on her shoulder and arm and by subsequently holding x.   that in mid-2016, the mother committed common assault and intimidation offences by, inter alia, waving a wooden spoon towards x and striking her on the leg and the hand, and (d) that on the same date, the mother committed the offence of common assault by hitting x with a plastic ruler on her shoulder and arm and by subsequently holding x.   that on the same date, the mother committed the offence of common assault by hitting x with a plastic ruler on her shoulder and arm and by subsequently holding x.
the presiding magistrate was aghast at the evidence that the father kept cameras in the home and clearly had used this evidence against me in court. ..... i have shown contrition and remorse and apologise for my actions unreservedly. i was subject to an avo [apprehended violence order] for twelve (12) months thereafter and have not breached the order in circumstances where my daughter was living with me
...was trying to inform the judge about current circumstance of my children, unfortunately judge did not response of my call. i believe that was a technical problem done by terrorist [ms o] and the court registry  ] 2021 i was attending to the fcc [...] with a telephone link hearing for 48 minutes but the court registry and legal aid lawyer [ms o’s] conspiracy and interfering that shutdown speaker phone during time of court hearing, therefore no communication has been made between me and the judge obradovic and i was unable to get permission to see my children as yet. the legal aid commission of nsw supporting the christian mother and against the muslim father and they don’t want that i could meet my children. [sic]  ] [x] said that, while she has not spent time with [mr frye], she saw him in 2021 when he attended her school and attempted to speak to her. [x] identified that she “got really scared” when she realised [mr frye] was present and reiterated that this was a “really scary experience.”
expert reports
family report dated 27 november 2018  the parent with whom the children live have sole parental responsibility because of the high conflict relationship characterised by a lack of trust between the parties, (b) unless there is veracity to the father’s allegations, the children live primarily with the mother, (c) if there is veracity to the mother’s allegations, the children spend no time and have no contact with the father, and (d) if there is no veracity to the mother’s allegations, the children spend time with the father on alternate weekends and for half school holidays.   unless there is veracity to the father’s allegations, the children live primarily with the mother, (c) if there is veracity to the mother’s allegations, the children spend no time and have no contact with the father, and (d) if there is no veracity to the mother’s allegations, the children spend time with the father on alternate weekends and for half school holidays.   if there is veracity to the mother’s allegations, the children spend no time and have no contact with the father, and (d) if there is no veracity to the mother’s allegations, the children spend time with the father on alternate weekends and for half school holidays.   if there is no veracity to the mother’s allegations, the children spend time with the father on alternate weekends and for half school holidays.
the family report is fraud, the family consultant [ms q] didn’t include many important issues which i was told her during the conference
addendum to family report dated 17 february 2022
however, i have rejected your call for update the family report [sic] at present five weeks before the final hearing which is unfair under the current circumstances. we have already family report had been done by the court [sic] on 27th of november 2018.   the mother have sole parental responsibility, (b) the children live with the mother, and (c) if there is veracity to the allegations that the father abused and threatened the children and perpetrated coercive and controlling family violence against the mother, the children spend no time with him and that he be restrained from contacting the children in any way.   the children live with the mother, and (c) if there is veracity to the allegations that the father abused and threatened the children and perpetrated coercive and controlling family violence against the mother, the children spend no time with him and that he be restrained from contacting the children in any way.   if there is veracity to the allegations that the father abused and threatened the children and perpetrated coercive and controlling family violence against the mother, the children spend no time with him and that he be restrained from contacting the children in any way.
report of ms p received by the parties 10 november 2022
it is difficult considering the history of the matter and the resistance [y] would feel from her mother and sister how realistic it will be for [y] to have a relationship with her father.
court’s determination
costs
conclusion
deputy associate: dated: 30 march 2023
dated: 30 march 2023