last updated: 23 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
yonjan & satyal [2023] fedcfamc2f 419
orders
the court orders by consent that:  first, the sum of $189,533.00 to the respondent via his solicitors hiway lawyers, and (b) second, pay the balance remaining to the applicant via her solicitors hope earle.   second, pay the balance remaining to the applicant via her solicitors hope earle.
nab offset account ending #...92
commsec shares portfolio accounts #...37 and #...26  first, in payment of costs, commission expenses and of the sale of the commsec shares, (b) second, to pay into the respondent’s solicitor’s trust account the amount sufficient to pay the estimated capital gains tax (cgt) for account #...37 and for such amount to be held and then paid by in accordance with paragraph 6 herein, (c) thirdly, to pay into the applicant’s solicitor’s trust account the amount sufficient to pay the estimated capital gains tax (cgt) for account #...26 and for such amount to be held and then paid by in accordance with paragraph 7 herein, (d) fourthly 55% of the balance to the applicant, and (e) fifthly, the remaining balance to the respondent.   second, to pay into the respondent’s solicitor’s trust account the amount sufficient to pay the estimated capital gains tax (cgt) for account #...37 and for such amount to be held and then paid by in accordance with paragraph 6 herein, (c) thirdly, to pay into the applicant’s solicitor’s trust account the amount sufficient to pay the estimated capital gains tax (cgt) for account #...26 and for such amount to be held and then paid by in accordance with paragraph 7 herein, (d) fourthly 55% of the balance to the applicant, and (e) fifthly, the remaining balance to the respondent.   thirdly, to pay into the applicant’s solicitor’s trust account the amount sufficient to pay the estimated capital gains tax (cgt) for account #...26 and for such amount to be held and then paid by in accordance with paragraph 7 herein, (d) fourthly 55% of the balance to the applicant, and (e) fifthly, the remaining balance to the respondent.   fourthly 55% of the balance to the applicant, and (e) fifthly, the remaining balance to the respondent.   fifthly, the remaining balance to the respondent.   the respondent will appoint an accountant to provide an estimate of the cgt payable by the respondent as a result of sale of his shares in the commsec portfolio account #...37 as if that capital gain were income earned after income from all other sources and provide such estimate to the applicant via her solicitors, (b) the amount estimated for cgt by the account will be held in the respondent’s solicitor’s trust account pending compliance with paragraph 5(c) and paragraph 6(d) below, (c) the respondent will do all things necessary to have his tax returns for the financial year in which the shares are sold, completed as soon as practicable by the accountant nominated by the respondent, (d) upon the respondent’s tax return being completed for the financial year in which the shares are sold, the respondent will provide a copy of his tax return including the cgt calculated as owing by him to the other party and any tax assessment to the applicant’s solicitor and this paragraph will authorise the respondent’s solicitor to pay the funds held in trust as follows: - (i) the amount owing by the respondent for capital gains tax to the australian taxation office, and (ii) to divide any balance as to 55% to the applicant and the balance to the respondent.   the amount estimated for cgt by the account will be held in the respondent’s solicitor’s trust account pending compliance with paragraph 5(c) and paragraph 6(d) below, (c) the respondent will do all things necessary to have his tax returns for the financial year in which the shares are sold, completed as soon as practicable by the accountant nominated by the respondent, (d) upon the respondent’s tax return being completed for the financial year in which the shares are sold, the respondent will provide a copy of his tax return including the cgt calculated as owing by him to the other party and any tax assessment to the applicant’s solicitor and this paragraph will authorise the respondent’s solicitor to pay the funds held in trust as follows: - (i) the amount owing by the respondent for capital gains tax to the australian taxation office, and (ii) to divide any balance as to 55% to the applicant and the balance to the respondent.   the respondent will do all things necessary to have his tax returns for the financial year in which the shares are sold, completed as soon as practicable by the accountant nominated by the respondent, (d) upon the respondent’s tax return being completed for the financial year in which the shares are sold, the respondent will provide a copy of his tax return including the cgt calculated as owing by him to the other party and any tax assessment to the applicant’s solicitor and this paragraph will authorise the respondent’s solicitor to pay the funds held in trust as follows: - (i) the amount owing by the respondent for capital gains tax to the australian taxation office, and (ii) to divide any balance as to 55% to the applicant and the balance to the respondent.   upon the respondent’s tax return being completed for the financial year in which the shares are sold, the respondent will provide a copy of his tax return including the cgt calculated as owing by him to the other party and any tax assessment to the applicant’s solicitor and this paragraph will authorise the respondent’s solicitor to pay the funds held in trust as follows: - (i) the amount owing by the respondent for capital gains tax to the australian taxation office, and (ii) to divide any balance as to 55% to the applicant and the balance to the respondent.   the amount owing by the respondent for capital gains tax to the australian taxation office, and (ii) to divide any balance as to 55% to the applicant and the balance to the respondent.  ) to divide any balance as to 55% to the applicant and the balance to the respondent.   the applicant will appoint an accountant to provide an estimate of the cgt payable by the applicant as a result of sale of her shares in the commsec portfolio account #...26 as if that capital gain were income earned after income from all other sources and provide such estimate to the applicant via her solicitors, (b) the amount estimated for cgt by the accountant will be held in the applicant’s solicitor’s trust account pending compliance with paragraph 6(c) and paragraph 7(d) below, (c) the applicant will do all things necessary to have her tax returns for the financial year in which the shares are sold, completed as soon as practicable by the accountant nominated by the applicant, (d) upon the applicant’s tax return being completed for the financial year in which the shares are sold, the applicant will provide a copy of her tax return including the cgt calculated as owing by her to the other party and any tax assessment to the respondent’s solicitor and this paragraph will authorise the applicants solicitor to pay the funds held in trust as follows: - (i) the amount owing by the respondent for capital gains tax to the australian taxation office, and (ii) to divide any balance as to 55% to the applicant and the balance to the respondent.   the amount estimated for cgt by the accountant will be held in the applicant’s solicitor’s trust account pending compliance with paragraph 6(c) and paragraph 7(d) below, (c) the applicant will do all things necessary to have her tax returns for the financial year in which the shares are sold, completed as soon as practicable by the accountant nominated by the applicant, (d) upon the applicant’s tax return being completed for the financial year in which the shares are sold, the applicant will provide a copy of her tax return including the cgt calculated as owing by her to the other party and any tax assessment to the respondent’s solicitor and this paragraph will authorise the applicants solicitor to pay the funds held in trust as follows: - (i) the amount owing by the respondent for capital gains tax to the australian taxation office, and (ii) to divide any balance as to 55% to the applicant and the balance to the respondent.   the applicant will do all things necessary to have her tax returns for the financial year in which the shares are sold, completed as soon as practicable by the accountant nominated by the applicant, (d) upon the applicant’s tax return being completed for the financial year in which the shares are sold, the applicant will provide a copy of her tax return including the cgt calculated as owing by her to the other party and any tax assessment to the respondent’s solicitor and this paragraph will authorise the applicants solicitor to pay the funds held in trust as follows: - (i) the amount owing by the respondent for capital gains tax to the australian taxation office, and (ii) to divide any balance as to 55% to the applicant and the balance to the respondent.   upon the applicant’s tax return being completed for the financial year in which the shares are sold, the applicant will provide a copy of her tax return including the cgt calculated as owing by her to the other party and any tax assessment to the respondent’s solicitor and this paragraph will authorise the applicants solicitor to pay the funds held in trust as follows: - (i) the amount owing by the respondent for capital gains tax to the australian taxation office, and (ii) to divide any balance as to 55% to the applicant and the balance to the respondent.
7a. the parties do all acts and things to sign all documents necessary to ensure the applicant has sole control and responsibility for: (a) company b phone number ..., and (b) c’s instagram account.   company b phone number ..., and (b) c’s instagram account.   c’s instagram account.
others  his cryptocurrency, (b) funds in his bank accounts and investments held in his name, (c) personal items and chattels currently in his possession, (d) his superannuation entitlements, and (e) all other property in his possession as at the date of these orders.   funds in his bank accounts and investments held in his name, (c) personal items and chattels currently in his possession, (d) his superannuation entitlements, and (e) all other property in his possession as at the date of these orders.   personal items and chattels currently in his possession, (d) his superannuation entitlements, and (e) all other property in his possession as at the date of these orders.   his superannuation entitlements, and (e) all other property in his possession as at the date of these orders.   all other property in his possession as at the date of these orders.   funds in her bank accounts and investments held in her name, (b) personal items and chattels currently in her possession, and (c) all other property in her possession as at the date of these orders.   personal items and chattels currently in her possession, and (c) all other property in her possession as at the date of these orders.   all other property in her possession as at the date of these orders.   any taxation liability, and (b) any personal loan or credit cards in his name.   any personal loan or credit cards in his name.   any taxation liability, and (b) any personal loan or credit cards in her name.   any personal loan or credit cards in her name.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party as at the current date, (b) monies standing to the credit of either party in any bank account are to become the property of the party in whose name the account is registered, with any accounts held jointly to be divided equally between the parties and thereafter closed, (c) each party forego any claims they may have to superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (d) insurance policies are the sole property of the beneficiary named thereon, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   monies standing to the credit of either party in any bank account are to become the property of the party in whose name the account is registered, with any accounts held jointly to be divided equally between the parties and thereafter closed, (c) each party forego any claims they may have to superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (d) insurance policies are the sole property of the beneficiary named thereon, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   each party forego any claims they may have to superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (d) insurance policies are the sole property of the beneficiary named thereon, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   insurance policies are the sole property of the beneficiary named thereon, and (e) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.   any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby expressly severed.
reasons for ex tempore judgment
judge o’shannessyintroduction
background
the proceedings
person who needs a litigation guardian (1) for these rules, a person needs a litigation guardian in relation to a proceeding if the person: (a) does not understand the nature and possible consequences of the proceeding, or (b) is not capable of adequately conducting, or giving adequate instruction for the conduct of, the proceeding. ...   does not understand the nature and possible consequences of the proceeding, or (b) is not capable of adequately conducting, or giving adequate instruction for the conduct of, the proceeding.   is not capable of adequately conducting, or giving adequate instruction for the conduct of, the proceeding.   where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.   where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.
... what the full court is saying in effect is that it was not appropriate, having regard to the facts before it, for a consideration of a negative contribution pursuant to para. (a) or (b) of sec. 79(4) to be taken into account. that is not to say, however, that conduct which amounts either to a deliberate diminution of the value of assets or to economic recklessness can never be taken into account in altering property interests... it does seem to me, however, that if a party has either by deliberate act or by economic recklessness reduced the value of assets available for distribution then the economic consequences which flow therefrom including the resultant burden to the other party are directly relevant to a consideration of the respective contributions of the parties contemplated by sec. 79(4). ... if a party has acted in the manner to which i have referred earlier either by: (a) embarking upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) acting recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value,   embarking upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) acting recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value,   acting recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value,
then such conduct in my view and the economic consequences which flow therefrom are clearly matters to which the court may have regard pursuant to the provisions of sec. 75(2)(o). if, on the other hand, losses of a financial kind have been suffered by the parties to a marriage in the course of the pursuit of matrimonial objectives, such as the gaining of income or the acquisition of assets whether the liability for such losses be joint or several then, in my view, such losses should be shared by the parties (although not necessarily equally) and taken into account when altering property interests.
...
... in our view, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, it should be inferred in proceedings pursuant to the provisions of s 79 that moneys howsoever received by a party during the course of the parties' cohabitation, are used by that party for the benefit of the family unit. such moneys, in those circumstances, thus constitute a financial contribution by the party who received the moneys.  ] in hickey and hickey and attorney-general for the commonwealth of australia (intervener) [2003] famca 395, (2003) flc 93-143 at [39] the full court, in setting out what the case law revealed as the “preferred approach” to the determination of an application under s 79 of the act, referred to four inter-related steps, including that “the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of ss. 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties”. the full court did not purport to elevate the preferred approach as being mandatory, as was observed by a later full court in bevan & bevan [2013] famcafc 116, (2013) flc 93-545 at [61]- [63], [72]. however, adoption of that preferred approach is a means by which many of the mandatory factors in s 75(2) of the act, in particular paragraph (b) – the income, property and financial resources of each of the parties, paragraph (ha) – ability of a creditor to recover debt, paragraph (n) – the terms of any proposed order under s 79 of the act, can be considered, as these must be considered, in determining any adjustment pursuant to s 75(2) of the act. conversely, if the preferred approach is not adopted there must be a means discernible from the reasons to identify that these relevant mandatory s 75(2) factors have been considered, and how they have been brought into account, in the making of any s 75(2) adjustment...  ] the case law reveals that there is a preferred approach to the determination of an application pursuant to the provisions of section 79. that approach involves four interrelated steps. firstly, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of hearing. secondly the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of section 79(4)(a), (b) & (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. thirdly the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in section 79(4) (d), (e), (f) & (g) (“the other factors”) including, because of section 79(4), the matters referred to in section 75(2) so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment study (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourthly, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case.  tations omitted)
3.4 the overarching purpose includes the following objectives:
... the resolution of disputes at a cost and by a process that is proportionate to the importance and complexity of the issues in dispute.
associate: dated: 14 april 2023
dated: 14 april 2023