last updated: 31 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
chadwick & chadwick [2023] fedcfamc2f 312
orders
on a final basis, the court orders that:  inform the mother, in writing, of any decision to be taken at least 14 days before the decision is required, (b) invite the mother’s views regarding the decision to be made, to be provided in writing, (c) give proper consideration to the mother’s views, and (d) inform the mother, in writing, of the decision within 48 hours of it having been made.   invite the mother’s views regarding the decision to be made, to be provided in writing, (c) give proper consideration to the mother’s views, and (d) inform the mother, in writing, of the decision within 48 hours of it having been made.   give proper consideration to the mother’s views, and (d) inform the mother, in writing, of the decision within 48 hours of it having been made.   inform the mother, in writing, of the decision within 48 hours of it having been made.   the children are to live with the father, (b) the children will be in regular contact with the mother, and (c) the mother will be undertaking some support treatment.   the children will be in regular contact with the mother, and (c) the mother will be undertaking some support treatment.   the mother will be undertaking some support treatment.   in lieu of the usual procedure of change of residence taking place at the court, for the purpose of order 5, by no later than 4:00pm on 4 april 2023, the parties and the independent children’s lawyer are to inform the court what arrangements have been made to transition the children into their father’s primary care.   for a period of 1 month from the date of these orders, the mother may call the children once per week, with the day and time to be agreed in writing between the parties, and the children may call the mother for a maximum of two additional times per week at their request, with such calls to be facilitated by the father, (b) following the expiry of the period set out in 7(a) above, for a period of 1 month, the mother may spend up to 6 hours with the children one day each weekend, with the day and time to be agreed in writing between the parties, but such time must be supervised by an independent person (or organisation) and a brief report is to be provided to the independent children’s lawyer and the court by the supervisor after each session, (c) following the expiry of the period set out in 7(b) above, for a period of 6 months month, the children are to spend time with the mother one overnight each alternate weekend, with the day and time to be agreed in writing between the parties, (d) following the expiry of the period set out in 7(c) above, for a period of 3 months, the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until 4pm on sunday, and (e) following the expiry of the period set out in 7(d) above, the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half of the school holidays.   following the expiry of the period set out in 7(a) above, for a period of 1 month, the mother may spend up to 6 hours with the children one day each weekend, with the day and time to be agreed in writing between the parties, but such time must be supervised by an independent person (or organisation) and a brief report is to be provided to the independent children’s lawyer and the court by the supervisor after each session, (c) following the expiry of the period set out in 7(b) above, for a period of 6 months month, the children are to spend time with the mother one overnight each alternate weekend, with the day and time to be agreed in writing between the parties, (d) following the expiry of the period set out in 7(c) above, for a period of 3 months, the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until 4pm on sunday, and (e) following the expiry of the period set out in 7(d) above, the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half of the school holidays.   following the expiry of the period set out in 7(b) above, for a period of 6 months month, the children are to spend time with the mother one overnight each alternate weekend, with the day and time to be agreed in writing between the parties, (d) following the expiry of the period set out in 7(c) above, for a period of 3 months, the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until 4pm on sunday, and (e) following the expiry of the period set out in 7(d) above, the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half of the school holidays.   following the expiry of the period set out in 7(c) above, for a period of 3 months, the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until 4pm on sunday, and (e) following the expiry of the period set out in 7(d) above, the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half of the school holidays.   following the expiry of the period set out in 7(d) above, the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half of the school holidays.
reasons for judgment
judge w j neville
introduction
ms treherne: your honour, the only – taking it one step at a time, the three layers, as your honour put it, that the court was considering, the – it might fall into the first layer, but it’s about the psychological harm that may have been caused to these two young girls with, as your honour said, systems abuse. it is a concern that the icl has. there has been many, many interviews and, in fact, my recollection of the subpoena material shows that the second interview was at the mother’s behest. she said, “you didn’t ask them direct questions. you need to”, and there’s a concern that [x], who from what i can gather from the evidence, has said, “dad stares at my vagina”, is in trauma counselling and has had almost 12 sessions. it is extraordinary. there is no good way to look at this with the mother’s late change because whether the mother has changed her mind doesn’t change the children’s experience. it’s a very difficult question for your honour. i think in a large part it depends on whether the mother has actually changed her view or whether this is a token exercise. as my learned friend mr haddock pointed out, there are concerns about the wider group that the children – the people not – and not just, might i say, on the mother’s side, but also given the gravity of the allegations, not just against the father but against [ms b], against his father and her – and his partner. it’s about whether they can put that behind them as well. now, the expert says that she has more faith in the father’s side perhaps coming around than she does perhaps with the mother, but that – again, it is difficult to see how one resolves that without some testing of the evidence, which is the concern that the icl has at this point.
applicant’s orders sought
3.1 until [y] commences school in 2021 each sunday at 5pm at the town c mcdonalds, or such other location as agreed in writing between the parties, and thereafter 3.2 at [d school] each friday. that notwithstanding the above the children shall spend: 4.1 fathers' day with their father from 9am to 5pm and mothers' day with their mother from 9am to 5pm or as otherwise agreed in writing, 4.2 from 5pm christmas eve to 5pm boxing day with the father in even numbered years and with the mother in odd numbered years or as otherwise agreed in writing. that [x] shall continue to attend at [d school] and [y] shall commence at [d school] at the beginning of 2021. that the parties shall participate in a post separation parenting course. each parent is free to be fully engaged in the school, sporting and extracurricular lives and activities of the children, to receive copies of school reports, newsletters and the like and to attend all events and functions to which parents are invited. that the children shall communicate with their parents in accordance with their wishes and the parent that has the children in their care shall facilitate any communication taking place between the children and the other parent. each parent shall advise the other in advance if they intend to take the children away from the [...]region for more than 48 hours and shall indicate where the children are going and when they will be back. that the parties shall communicate via email in relation to matters concerning the children, unless there is a medical emergency involving the children or either parent when the children are in their care it will be via telephone. by this order all schools, medical or dental practitioners and organisers of extracurricular activities are authorised to discuss all matters relating to the children with both parents and release all information concerning the children to both parties as may be requested by either parent from time to time. that the parents shall notify the other of any significant illness or medical emergency in relation to the children as soon as practicable by telephone call and will provide any necessary authority to the children's treating medical practitioners to enable the other to obtain written oral information about any treatment, consultation, diagnosis or prognosis in relation to the children. that neither parent shall say any unkind or uncomplimentary things about the other parent, or the other parent's family members or the other parent's partner, to or in the presence of the children and shall do all necessary things to ensure that no third party makes any disparaging remarks to the children or in their presence about the other parent, their family or their partner. that the parents shall keep the other informed as to their current contact number, residential address and email address and will advise the other in writing within 48 hours of any change. that neither parent shall harass, threaten or intimidate the other parent, the children or any partner of either parent and will use their best endeavours to ensure that no third party engages in any behaviour that harasses, threatens or intimidates either parent, the children of any partner of either parent. that the father have sole parental responsibility for the children [x], born [in] 2012 and [y], born [in] 2016 ("the children"). that the children shall live with their father. that the children shall spend time with and communicate with their mother as follows: 18.1 following a moratorium of 6 months after the transition of the children into their father’s care, during which time the mother shall spend no time nor communicate with the children, then: 18.2 for a period of 6 months from the expiry of 18.1 above: 18.2.1 supervised time each alternate weekend from 9am to 5pm on saturday and sunday 18.2.2 by telephone or video call for up to 30 minutes each wednesday 18.3 following the expiry of the period set out in 18.2 above: 18.3.1 from the conclusion of school friday to the commencement of school monday, or 9am monday if monday is not a school day each alternate weekend, and 18.3.2 by telephone or video call for up to 30 minutes each wednesday the father shall arrange and facilitate, at his expense, therapeutic counselling and assistance for himself and the children to help them cope with the transition into his care for such period of time as the counsellor recommends. the mother shall arrange at her expense and participate in psychological counselling for herself for a period of no less than 12 months with sessions not less than once per fortnight or as recommended by the treating psychologist the father shall keep the mother advised by the parenting app our family wizard as to any significant developments in the children as and when such developments occur. the mother is restrained from attempting to make contact with either of the children, save as provided by these orders or unless the mother has the prior written consent of the father. the father is permitted to suspend the mother’s time for up to 3 weeks for the purpose of taking the children away on a holiday on more than 2 times in each calendar year and will provide the mother with no less than 14 days prior to the time taking place written notice of his intention to do this.
respondent’s orders sought
recitals: on monday 29 august 2022, the parties received a child and youth protection services (“cyps”) appraisal outcome advice. cyps were unable to determine if sexual abuse has or has not occurred. cyps have recommended that the parties “focus of recovery of relationships within the family unit to provide stability and sense of identify for the children”. the mother acknowledges this recommendation, accordingly: amended final orders sought by the respondent mother the respondent mother (“the mother”) seeks the following final orders, that: the mother has sole parental responsibility for the children [x] born [in] 2012 and [y] born [in] 2016 (collectively known as “the children”). notwithstanding order 1 above, the mother will: provide the father with as much notice as possible of any major long-term decision which she is planning to make for the children or either of them, give the father the opportunity to comment, take account of any views which the father expresses within a reasonable timeframe, and notify him of the decision she has made. the children live with the mother. the parties will forthwith take steps to agree on an appropriate psychologist “the psychologist” to meet with the children for the purposes of explaining these orders to them and assisting them to transition back to spending time with the father. in the event agreement cannot be reached in this regard within 14 days of the date of these orders, the psychologist shall be the person nominated by the independent children’s lawyer. the mother and father shall equally pay the costs of the psychologist. the father will forthwith enrol in the [e course] and [f course] and will complete these programs and provide evidence of completion to the mother and it is noted that the mother has completed both of these programs. the parties will forthwith take steps to register with [g contact centre] for the purposes of the father spending supervised time with the children. spend time with orders stage 1- upon the psychologist confirming to the parties that she or he has done such work with the children as is necessary to prepare them to recommence spending time with the father, the children will spend time with the father supervised by [g contact centre], for a period 6 months, for up to two hours on a saturday or sunday each alternate week, with the father to pay the costs of the supervision and to obtain and pay for a report and provide it to the mother. stage 2- for a period of a further 3 months, the children will spend time with the father each alternate saturday from 10am until 4pm. stage 3- for a period of a further 3 months, the children will spend time with the father each alternate weekend from saturday at 10am until sunday at 4pm. stage 4 (final stage)- thereafter the children will spend time with the father: during school terms each alternate week from friday after school until sunday at 4pm, during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays for the first half in even-numbered years and for the second half in odd-numbered years, during the summer school holidays on a week about basis, commencing with the parent who has not had the children the previous weekend on the last friday of the school term, with changeover occurring each subsequent friday at 4pm. notwithstanding anything else in these orders the children shall spend time with their parents as follows: commencing father’s day 2023, on father’s day with their father from 9am to 5pm and mother’s day with their mother from 9am to 5pm, commencing christmas eve 2023: in odd numbered years, the children spend time with the father from 2pm christmas eve to 2pm christmas day and with the mother from 2pm christmas day until 2pm boxing day, in even numbered years, the children spend time with the mother from 2pm christmas eve to 2pm christmas day and with the father from 2pm christmas day until 2pm boxing day, for the purposes of changeover: on school days they shall take place at [d school] if applicable, on non-school days from [town c] mcdonalds and in this regard, the parent who is to receive the children will remain inside mcdonalds in view of the children and the other parent shall farewell the children at the entrance. for the purposes of order 10(b) above, the first half of the school holidays commences from after school on the last friday of the school term and ends at 5pm on the second saturday of the school term and the second half of the school holidays commences from 5pm on the second saturday and ends at 5pm on the last sunday. the parties shall only contact each other about matters concerning the children and such contact shall be concise, respectful and business-like. in this regard, the parties shall limit written communication between themselves to no more than one message a fortnight through the our family wizard parenting app, except in the event of an emergency. each parent is free to be fully engaged in the school, sporting and extracurricular lives and activities of the children, to receive copies of school reports, newsletters and the like and to attend all events and functions to which parents are invited. the children shall communicate with their parents in accordance with their wishes and the parent that has the children in their care shall facilitate any communication taking place between the children and the other parent. each parent shall advise the other in advance if they intend to take the children away from the [...]region for more than 48 hours and shall indicate where the children are going and when they will be back. by this order all schools, medical or dental practitioners and organisers activities are authorised to discuss all matters relating to the children with each parent and release all information concerning the children to both parties as may be requested by either parent from time to time. the parents shall notify the other of any significant illness or medical emergency in relation to the children as soon as practicable through the parenting app and will provide any necessary authority to the children's treating medical practitioners to enable the other to obtain written oral information about any treatment, consultation, diagnosis or prognosis in relation to the children. neither parent shall say any unkind or uncomplimentary things about the other parent, or the other parent's family members or the other parent's partner, to or in the presence of the children and shall do all necessary things to ensure that no third party makes any disparaging remarks to the children or in their presence about the other parent, their family or their partner. the parents shall keep the other informed as to their current contact number, residential address and email address and will advise the other in writing within 48 hours of any change. the father provide the mother with his current residential address within 7 days of the making of these orders. neither parent shall harass, threaten or intimidate the other parent, the children or any partner of either parent and will use their best endeavours to ensure that no third party engages in any behaviour that harasses, threatens or intimidates either parent, the children of any partner of either parent. unless otherwise agreed the father shall not attend at [h street, suburb j] where the mother lives and the mother shall not attend the father’s residence. on a without admissions basis, the parties shall refrain from viewing, sharing or exposing the children (directly or indirectly) to pornographic or sexually explicit images and shall use their best endeavours to ensure that no third party exposes the children directly or indirectly to a pornographic or sexually explicit images. the mother have liberty to suspend the time arrangements between the father and the children under these orders for a period of up to 2 weeks each year upon one month’s notice to enable the mother to have an extended holiday with the children. the mother and father can vary the terms of these orders by agreement in writing.
independent children’s lawyers orders sought
the father’s evidence
and that can be avoided, can’t it, by a proposal like [ms chadwick’s], which would see gradual reintroduction of time with some psychological help for the children initially, and a progression towards something close to an eight/six arrangement. all of that trauma could be avoided?---i – i desperately and strongly disagree with that. can you accept that [y] may have said the things [ms chadwick] has reported her as saying. can you accept she may have said them?---i don’t accept any of the things that have been said to [ms chadwick] by [y], or alleged to have been said. i will only – i do accept anything that she has said to sacat and cyps, individuals who are a third party to this and have no invested interest, and i will believe trained professionals. ... right. so is it fair to say that, other than being taken through – line-by-line through this contention – that contention, whatever, you can’t make a general acceptance on what has been said by [y] to [ms chadwick] over the last year?---correct, because there are some – there are some things where i – these – [y] and [x] and i need to have, moving forward, faith that if something does happen and it is told to their mother, that it’s the truth and i would believe it, and still moving forward, if anything happens, i’m going to have to work with her and believe those things or – or – or make sure that the kids are looked after. so before these allegations, if [y], for example, said that her vagina was sore, i’m red/green colour blind, so i can’t see an irritated piece of skin, and i previously, at the start of our breakdown of the relationship, [x] had advised that her vagina was sore and i had contacted [ms chadwick] and possibly to get her over to the house to have a look because i genuinely can’t see sunburn until it gets extraordinarily bad. so at that point i want, and i need to, and on those matters the girls need to tell her stuff and i need to believe it. so there are some things when, yes, if [y] and [x] have said that, then i will believe them, but i do not believe the allegations that [y] is said to have made to [ms chadwick].
and if it was – if [ms chadwick] was simply making up what [y] said to her, you would agree with me that they’re very odd things to make up, aren’t they, that you put a doll in her vagina. that would be an odd, surprising accusation to make up?---it would, given that i don’t have that doll and [ms chadwick] had the – had the doll and has pictures of it.
so at one level – let’s cut to the chase. where do you think [y] got all this extraordinary stuff from?---what’s right in front of me or the very extraordinary stuff, as in, like, the recent - - - no, no, i’m just asking generally. just for the moment, stick to the stuff that has been stated to what i will call the officials – police, care and protection, etcetera. where did a five-year-old get this level of graphic detail?---i can’t answer that because i don’t know for, (1) i don’t – i don’t shower with either of the children and i haven’t since before [y] was born. i don’t have that doll at my house. i have never poked her on the vagina. i certainly don’t wee in the shower and wee in the shower in front of the kids and see how high it goes. i don’t - - - no. sorry, i’m not asking you to go through a detailed denial of all the things. you have made clear your denial of all – of any and all of these allegations. but i’m just simply asking, doing the best that you can – and you may not have an answer – where do you think she got this – you know, where does a five-year-old get this sort of graphic detail from?---i can’t – i don’t know, your honour.
dr behrens: you see that. so the first thing you say there is:
is it my opinion that these allegations are another example of [ms chadwick] deliberately, in a calculated manner, seeking to further alienate [y] and [x] from me.
can you see that?---yes. i can. and that’s something that you still believe notwithstanding your evidence to his honour this morning, is it?---i still believe that. yes. and you go on to talk about [ms chadwick] has mental health issues you were worried about?---yes. you see that. so this is a statement that you’ve written back in 2021, and i think you said in answer to a question i asked that it’s because of things that have happened today you have concerns about [ms chadwick’s] mental health. but here you seem to be saying you had – [ms chadwick] had mental health issues back then as well?---it has further entrenched my concerns. you’ve said on the next page, 137, in the third full paragraph, which starts:
every one of these matters, [ms chadwick] continues to utilise the systems and processes in place to protect persons who do require the valuable time of police and the courts in a manner that demonstrates she is a vexatious litigant.
can you see that there?---seen.
i’m not sure how any of these pictures have gotten on there as that tablet has never been used for that. i’d appreciate it if you delete those pictures, do not save them or share them. as you’d appreciate, i’m upset she saw these images. be mindful that sharing, saving them, or using them without my permission could breach the act revenge porn legislation.
no?---it’s a kid under a – over a sprinkler. yes. sure. and turning to [y], before the allegations were made – so i want to be clear about the timeframes. before august 2021. did you ever observe [y] to exhibit any troubling behaviours?---no, and i think [ms k’s] report really sums y up well. she’s – she’s – she’s pretty robust, but no troubling behaviours. only the same thing as [x]. she loves to run around the back yard naked under a sprinkler or whatever. i think most children have done that at one occasion, [ms chadwick], so that’s – that’s not controversial. you never received any report from the school about either [x] or [y] acting up?---no. no, i think there was a time when [x] had been in a bit of a – like, an issue with some friendship group. i don’t know whether she was acting up or it was just a conflict between a number of girls. i think it was – it could have been 2020 or 2021 when she went back to school and – but [ms o] looked after it pretty well and looked after [x], but i wouldn’t say it was acting up. it was just in relation to young girls finding their feet with other young friendship groups. yes. now, i take it you were very surprised by the mother’s change in position that came through on tuesday night?---i was. because the allegations that were made against you were extremely serious, weren’t they?---they were. they were the worst. in fact, you probably couldn’t contemplate a worse allegation being made against you, is that right?---no, it’s the worst. yes. and you – at the time you were made aware, you were extremely upset, in august 2021?---yes, correct. and, in fact, the records record you during an interview crying and – and sobbing?---is that with cyps? yes?---correct. and no doubt this has been an extremely difficult year for you?---it has been horrible. and at one point you were considering moving to queensland and changing your name. that’s right?---that – yes, that was a – yes. and that was a result of you being made aware of these allegations against you, is that right?---it – yes, but also – it was an overreaction, is the honest answer.
okay. if she had contacted you, sir, what would you – what would you have done?---so if she first said about the initial one about the doll and weeing in the shower and - - - yes?---well, i would have responded with the kids haven’t seen me naked since before [y] was born. the only time that they could do, see me partially naked is at the swimming pool when we get changed. that i don’t shower with either of them, and that i don’t have [a] doll to push into [y]’s vagina. okay. and you would still expect then the mother to report it if that’s the - - -?---if she – if she believes it, or has doubt, yes, go for it.
if – what do you say about supervision for that first phase?---now that we have had our fifth investigation outcome that there’s no risk, that i’m a fit and able parent and that the allegations once again are demonstrated not to have occurred, i don’t see a reason for supervised care. i see?---but i understand that if it’s because of her own anxiety or if it’s in the best interests of the kids, that these – that it has to occur. it doesn’t mean that i won’t partake in it. i just don’t see why now – i offered it many times in the past and i offered it after the first cyps investigation. it was denied on every occasion and was never engaged with, so i don’t see why now i should have to partake in supervised care to reintroduce myself when there was no discussion about excluding me for 12 months. i think that the investigations have shown that i’m a fit and able parent and provide a safe and loving family home, so i should be able to go back to being their father. and the children have never experienced any time with you that has been supervised, have they?---no, they’ve - - -
do you agree that perhaps a gradual introduction is better for your girls than simply going straight into, you know, bigger periods of time? for example, starting with one day and then building up to two, and – and so on and so forth?---i can’t disagree with that, but i also can’t actually argue against four days – four nights being reinstated again as well. the bigger issue i have is the recent cyps investigation now points to there being emotional harm caused to the children, which was not reported in – in their finding of 12 october, so that the issue i now have is that they’re in the care – over the last 12 months when this finding has changed and determined that, that they have only been in the care of one parent. how – how can that be ignored, that this now finding of emotional distress has occurred, but questions around my ability to care for them for the same periods of time is brought into question when i have never excluded them from their mother, and i have always had that in mind? ... okay. and then your position is that the more time the children spend with you, the better in that – in those circumstances, to ameliorate any risk of the emotional abuse, is that – is that so?---this – yes, and this comes back with the initial period of six months. but, look, i can’t give you an honest answer. i’m not an expert, but i can only draw guidance on someone like [ms k]. if [ms k] gets up here and says, “no, absolutely not. this is how it should be done,” then that’s the way it should be done. if [ms k] gets up here and says another totally different thing and says, “no, they should have eight months away from their mother,” or, “eight months away from their father,” then that’s what i will accept. i will accept the educated outcome of someone who has looked at the facts of this case and told me what the best treatment plan is. my emotions and my desires are obviously to have the girls back in my life fifty-fifty and to be part of everything, to go to school concerts, to go to [sports], to take them away camping, to see their family, to go ride a bicycle with them, to get an ice cream with them. that’s it.
when the children are present, sorry, i should say?---yes. no, i understand. no, we are very much similar people in terms of our emotions and dealing with them, and being able to understand why we feel something, and you’re allowed to feel things even if they’re illogical, but it doesn’t mean you do something because of it. we have quite an open relationship and these proceedings have helped that, and we talk about our feelings and our emotions, and we have already talked about going forward what we will do, and it will be no different to how we acted previously. there were a number of things in the way matters were dealt with previously that annoyed her, but she never treated the children any differently. she actually wanted to meet [ms chadwick] before she met the kids, and as a result of the escalation and, for example, accusing [ms r] of holding [y] too tight and bruising her, we chose to not introduce, because i thought that that would only inflame matters.
the evidence of the father’s partner – ms b
ms treherne: and you’re also aware that [mr chadwick] proposes that the children come to immediately live with you and him?---yes, i am. and you have head those discussions with [mr chadwick]?---yes, i have. and have you given any thought to how you might manage the girls’ reaction at that time?---yes. we have given that significant thought. obviously, it would be a very abrupt change. having never been in a situation like this, we would seek to have any assistance we could from professionals who could help us understand what they’re going through, how best to manage them, deal with the questions, reassure them, make sure that they know they’re safe and can express how they’re feeling in a safe and loving environment. [ms b], your personal viewpoint, if you will, the mother has never met you, has she?---no. and no doubt, because of the hurtful allegations, do you agree that there will be some work on your behalf to get passed those for the purpose of continuing a relationship with [ms chadwick] in the future?---yes, of course. it would be naïve to think that i wouldn’t need some assistance, i suppose, to understand and move passed those. i – i feel like i haven’t taken on board them so personally because i have been focused on [mr chadwick] and his reactions and – and the children as well. my involvement in everything has always been supportive. the allegations that were levelled against me, while, yes, they were very hurtful, they were done by someone who doesn’t know me as a person, and so i didn’t feel like they were personally attacking myself, because how can you accuse someone without knowing them personally and who they are and what they are capable of? i’ve experienced in my previous relationship significant hurt [...] i was able to move passed the hurt that caused – was caused by that and support him [...] and continue a friendship [...], and i feel that those abilities can help me deal with another difficult or different circumstance. i would hope that i would have the skills and the ability necessary to do – do that again in this situation.
the mother’s evidence
can you tell his honour why you instructed the filing of that minute?‑‑‑yes. the – the cyps outcome had only been received the day before. and i acknowledge that the cyps outcome determines – said they were unable to determine whether sexual abuse had or had not occurred and was recommending resolving relationships in the family. and i would like to support that and, you know, allow the children to have the ability to have a relationship with both parents in a supported and careful, you know, transition in a way that will allow them to feel comfortable.
his honour: do you accept or acknowledge that, effectively, the same conclusion was reached in earlier cyps reports, reviews, etcetera?‑‑‑it’s a very difficult question, because [ms s], who – from cyps, who acknowledged the many flaws in that investigation ‑ ‑ ‑ yes. no, no, i understand that. you know, whatever the alleged flaws, whatever else, but the conclusions along the way have been, speaking in very general terms, consistent. do you accept that or not?‑‑‑it’s a very difficult question, because [ms s] herself had said she was on the cusp of substantiating the abuse. so it’s ‑ ‑ ‑ yes. no. sorry, we can’t deal with, you know, what so and so may or may not have said. the court has got these formal documents from cyps and the conclusions are what’s in those documents. that’s what i’m really asking about?‑‑‑i accept that that is the conclusion they came to. however, the – the information behind it, contained in the 69zw ‑ ‑ ‑ well, be careful. no. be careful. be careful. just – i’m just asking a simple question about those documents, that’s all?‑‑‑sorry, your honour. we will get to all of the other stuff, i’m sure.
his honour: would you accept that [mr chadwick] and [ms b] have also suffered very significant stress as a result of the allegations?‑‑‑yes, i accept that. but i would like to point out that the allegations are not allegations, they are disclosures from [y] that she made to me. yes. that was not my question?‑‑‑i’m sorry, your honour. it was whether or not you recognise – and this is slightly different, but it’s only qualified in one small respect – that the father and [ms b] have suffered extreme distress over the last 12 months-plus since august last year. would you accept that, acknowledge that?‑‑‑i would acknowledge that. and so have i. well, yes, but the allegations are not made against you. i’m just asking about your acknowledgment of them?‑‑‑i understand.
mr haddock: do you think maybe that one of your weaknesses as a parent is your anxieties? do you think maybe that’s one of your weaknesses as a parent?‑‑‑i – i love and care for my children and i – i think i have an appropriate level of anxiety about things for them and i think i manage that. so is that a no?‑‑‑i don’t have anxiety, though. okay. so you say you don’t have anxiety?‑‑‑everybody feels anxious at some point. but i have not been diagnosed with anxiety. right. do you think maybe sometimes the way you react to what you call disclosures – and i will use your word for the moment – do you think maybe that sometimes the way you choose to react to those disclosures might be a weakness on your part when it comes to your parenting, or do you not agree with that?‑‑‑i would say that is possible. but there is no rulebook when a child makes a disclosure to you and you’re faced with having to – it’s gut-wrenching to listen to a child talk to you about something that they’re telling you has happened from their own father, no doubt, and try to process that while i’m also my first ‑ ‑ ‑ “no doubt”, madam? that really your position, isn’t it. you believe these things have happened, don’t you?‑‑‑i hoped there was another explanation and i do believe that [y] is telling me what she believes has happened. well, let’s get right to the point. let’s not try to work around it. you believe that what [y] has said to you on each and every occasion about her father’s behaviour, sexual or otherwise, is true and correct, don’t you?‑‑‑i accept that there are times that children can become confused or mixed up and i do understand that that is a part of young children understanding their world. however, i do believe what she has told me. but i also don’t – i – i just – i hoped there was another explanation and it is ‑ ‑ ‑ sure. well, i will ask you the question more directly, because you’re not answering it. you believe he sexually abused [y], don’t you?‑‑‑i – i really hope that that’s not the case. i’m – i – i still have concerns. sure. well, you can hope all you want. i’m asking what you believe. you really believe that he has done that to [y], don’t you? sitting there today in the witness box, that’s what you really believe, correct?‑‑‑yes, that’s correct. so when i read your minute of order that you’ve brought on and it says that you make these acknowledgments at the start of the minute, which is what they call recitals, you make a serious of acknowledgments – one of the things that you don’t acknowledge is that you consider that he hasn’t sexually abused the children. you don’t say he hasn’t sexually abused [y] or [x], do you?‑‑‑not in those orders, no. no. because you believe he has, don’t you?‑‑‑yes. yes. you believe that he’s a man that has taken [a] doll and he has put it inside [y]’s vagina. you believe that happened, don’t you?‑‑‑yes, because she has disclosed that to me and others. i didn’t ask you the because, madam. listen to the question. you believe that has happened, don’t you?‑‑‑i do. i have ‑ ‑ ‑ thank you?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ genuine concerns. okay. well – thank you – i will get to the genuineness of them in a moment with you. all right. it means that you think he has groomed [x] sexually, you think he has done that, don’t you?‑‑‑those are the things [x] told me, yes. [x] may have told you those things, madam. i’m asking you a different question. you believe he has groomed [x], don’t you?‑‑‑i believe what [x] has told me, yes. and i have concerns that that happened. okay. well, if you believe it, it follows you must have concerns, correct?‑‑‑yes, that’s correct. right. so whether [x] has told you it or not, that belief resides with you, doesn’t it, if you take some responsibility and ownership for the belief you have as a person? do you accept that?‑‑‑yes. right. and so that must also mean that you believe that [ms b] has been, to use your words, complicit in abusing the children?‑‑‑that’s not entirely correct. in my affidavit, i explained that, yes, [y] mentioned things about [ms b] and i – i feel as though it seems like it was unlikely to have happened exactly the way that [y] said it. but i do have concerns about the way [ms b] had complied with [mr chadwick]’s behaviour.
now, when i look at your order 4, which i’ve just read out to you, and i will go through that again, you say:
the purpose of the psychologist is to explain the orders to the children and assist them to transition back to spending time with their father.
so that’s obviously not to explain to them that you formed the view that their father hasn’t abused them. that’s not the purpose of it, is it?‑‑‑that could be part of it if it ‑ ‑ ‑ because you’re not going to communicate to the children yourself that you think their father hasn’t abused them, because that’s not what you believe, is it?‑‑‑in light of the cyps outcome, i am prepared to do whatever is needed to support my children to have a relationship with their father. right. so if they come to you and say, “dad stuck his penis against me,” what are you going to do?‑‑‑i have thought about that and ‑ ‑ ‑ i’m glad. can you answer my question, please?‑‑‑yes. may i have a moment? i think that what i would do differently is to speak with [mr chadwick] about it, something – if something had come up and advise him that that’s something that had been said, so that we could work out where that may have come from and decide if we were – as a co-parenting team.
so what you’ve not done is answered me or my question concerning whether you will tell the girls that your view is that they are safe with their father from sexual abuse. is that something you’re going to tell them?‑‑‑as i already said, given the outcome from cyps and the fact that there is that they were unable to determine if it had or hadn’t happened, then i would be supporting that and acknowledging that, like i have in my orders proposed. that’s not what i’ve asked you, is it, madam?‑‑‑i’m sorry, can you please repeat the question? of course i can. are you going to tell these two children that they are safe from being sexually abused by their father, yes or no?‑‑‑i would say that with the support of a counsellor that would be the most appropriate thing to do, with – with help. i don’t think ‑ ‑ ‑ so if it’s the most appropriate thing to do or not, are you going to do it, yes or no?‑‑‑yes. you’re going to tell them that they’re safe with their father?‑‑‑yes. are you going to ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑and i would encourage their relationship with him so they can start recovering that and rebuilding it.
... so you’re going to tell them it’s essential for them to have a relationship with their father, are you?‑‑‑that has always been my – the – how i would like – would have liked things to be. i have always encouraged them to have a relationship with their father until [y] made these disclosures and then i had – did everything i could to protect her and to keep them safe. she has been suffering for 12 months, unable to sleep, having horrendous nightmares, disclosing more details of the abuse over the last 12 months. his honour: i understand. that’s all in your affidavit and also in your emails to ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. to care and protection, even as recently as early last month?‑‑‑yes, i have reported everything [y] has told me in real time, that’s correct. so dreams become the basis of disclosures?‑‑‑no. [y]’s trauma counsellor had spoken with me about that and she said children as young as [y], being four at the time of the initial disclosures and now five, they are – they have difficulty understanding what a flashback is. and the way of understanding it is that it’s a dream. but she would often report these bad dreams or nightmares before she had even been to sleep. that – that is what happened. no, i understand. that’s in your material?‑‑‑so, yes, it does say nightmares and bad dreams. that is what she called them. and the trauma counsellor explained to me that that’s how a child as young as [y] processes a flashback. that’s what she understands it to be. so let me ask you this, where you have confirmed in your answers to mr haddock that personally you believe that the abuse as described by [y] has taken place, correct?‑‑‑yes, that’s correct. so how are you going to, as it were, reconcile that and be sufficiently convincing to the girls to say, “it’s fine to go and spend time with dad again”?‑‑‑i believe that i will need to seek some support of my own to be able to help me with processing and managing the anxiety you mentioned and also to be able to properly talk with them about it and – and be appropriately encouraging and supportive.
just bear with me one moment, please, ma’am. now, what actually happens on the 27th is there’s what you say is a series of disclosures in the morning, there’s then a sacat interview and then there’s what you say are a series of disclosures in the evening when [y] is in the bath, that’s right, isn’t it?‑‑‑no, i don’t believe so. no? you say i’m wrong about that, do you?‑‑‑i – as i recall, they were – further disclosures were made the next morning. so you say those are the next morning, do you?‑‑‑as far as i recall. right. just pardon me one moment and i will get them. now, you talk about the disclosure on the morning at paragraph 26 of your affidavit. and you say that [y] woke up next to you:
...sighs, covers her face with her hands and says, “dad always comes in the shower with me. his penis is in my face.”[57]
and you were shocked. why were you shocked?‑‑‑because [y] doesn’t like to have showers. she gets frantic when the water is in her eyes. and i was shocked because she was saying that his penis was in her face and it was clearly uncomfortable for her. right. well, i don’t know about clearly uncomfortable just yet when i look at your affidavit. but you say then that you said, “did you want to have a shower with dad?” why would you ask that?‑‑‑because i’m aware – i know my child well and she doesn’t like to have showers. so i was surprised that she would be in there and i wondered if maybe she had asked to have a shower. well, was it actually because you wanted to think that maybe her father had forced her to do something? was that the reason you asked that?‑‑‑no, that’s not the reason. i was trying to – as i’ve already said, i was hoping there was an innocent explanation for things. right. well, when we went on, you have [y] saying:
dad says i have to have a shower with him. he pinches and pulls my vagina and i tell him not to but he just stares.
now, that’s what you say she said to you?‑‑‑yes. and then she ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑that’s correct. you then say:
she imitated a blank stare without emotion.
?‑‑‑yes, that’s correct. do you think maybe when we’re talking about blank stares without emotion that we might be in danger of just looking at it in a particular way that’s not quite true?‑‑‑ [y] was imitating the way her father looked. that’s what she was saying to me. right. so just thinking about this for the moment, you know from the police material that what y then said to the police was, “he has never pulled my vagina.” you know that, don’t you?‑‑‑yes, i’m aware that that was recorded in her interview. right. and you’re aware that was reported, but there’s no mention of that anywhere at all in your affidavit, is there?‑‑‑i feel it’s a little bit difficult to mention absolutely everything in the affidavit. yes, the – i don’t think that part was mentioned. do you not think it’s important to give the detail of what your child actually said that might demonstrate there might be some inconsistencies with the disclosure to his honour in your affidavit?‑‑‑i believe i have passed on what was actually said, because ‑ ‑ ‑ do you?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ that is what [y] said to me, that’s what i know. well, what you don’t pass on is a range of things that [y] said to the police about disclosures. so, for example, you knew that she told the police that her father had never hurt her, correct?‑‑‑i think i remember reading that, yes. right. it’s not in your affidavit, is it?‑‑‑i don’t think so. you knew she told the police she was wearing swimmers at the time she was in the shower but they didn’t cover her vagina and backside. you knew she told the police that, didn’t you?‑‑‑i did, yes, that’s correct. and you left that out of your affidavit because it was a bit that didn’t make any sense. that’s why you left that out, correct?‑‑‑that’s true, it didn’t make sense, yes. so the bits that ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑i thought it was odd. the bits that you thought didn’t make sense, in terms of the sexual abuse disclosure, you left out of your affidavit, correct?‑‑‑i suppose that’s correct, yes. you know she told the police she hasn’t touched daddy’s penis?‑‑‑i think that’s what was in the – i – i don’t have the interview in front of me, so i can’t ‑ ‑ ‑ right. well, if i read to you from the interview, “hasn’t touched daddy’s penis”. now, accept that i’m reading that truthfully for just one moment. if we think about that, that would mean that the thing [y] has told to you later on about touching daddy’s penis is a lie, correct?‑‑‑i – no, i don’t think that’s correct. right. so she’s either lying to you there or she’s lying to the police, isn’t she?‑‑‑i don’t believe she’s lying. she was a child under a huge amount of stress. she was put in a situation where i was not in the room with her after she had just disclosed to me that her father had sexually abused her. she’s interviewed in the afternoon, isn’t she, madam?‑‑‑she was interviewed that day. yes. in the afternoon, correct?‑‑‑yes. and she makes the disclosure to you, you say, at 7.30 am, correct?‑‑‑yes. but the sacat were able to see us in the afternoon. and do you accept she was being interviewed by professionally trained police officers for this purpose?‑‑‑i do. right?‑‑‑and ‑ ‑ ‑ and you didn’t think it was important to tell his honour that one of the things that she had said to them was she hadn’t touched her father’s penis. that’s your position, isn’t it?‑‑‑what i was going to say is that i wasn’t – i wasn’t present. she had only just started to disclose details to me. can you answer my question, please, madam?‑‑‑and she was with unfamiliar people. can you answer my question, please, madam?‑‑‑yes. yes. it was recorded in the interview. his honour: so you didn’t think that was a significant thing?‑‑‑i did think it was significant. but she had also just said to me in the morning that she had touched it, so ‑ ‑ ‑ no, no, i understand. but why would one be more important than the other when they both concern the same event?‑‑‑to be fair, i didn’t have access to that interview until quite some time later. so at the – on the day when she disclosed to me ‑ ‑ ‑ no, no. no, i understand. but what’s being asked of you is about what’s in your affidavit material. understand?‑‑‑i understand. and please don’t think that anyone in this courtroom is trying to be insensitive or gross or whatever. because each of the adults who are involved with these girls have been through terrible, terrible circumstances, terrible situations?‑‑‑i did the thing i thought was best to protect her. and that’s to report it and to ‑ ‑ ‑
his honour: but just in general terms, though, you would have had it for a significant period of time before you did the affidavits?‑‑‑yes right?‑‑‑that’s a fair thing to say. mr haddock: because one of the things you also knew that [y] told the police was that she had never been pinched, she just knows what pinching is. you knew she said that to the police, too, didn’t you?‑‑‑yes, i’m aware. and there’s nothing about that in your affidavit either, is there?‑‑‑i don’t think so. no. and that she said, “daddy has never made me upset.” she said that to the police as well, didn’t she?‑‑‑i don’t have it in front of me, but i think, yes, she said something like that. and that statement is so totally different from everything you say about y’s whole experience of life with her father up till 27 august, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes. no mention of that anywhere in your affidavit, is there?‑‑‑i mean, i don’t think so, no. for example, you know that when she demonstrated the doll poking in her, and she says, “he poked the doll in me,” she pushed the fingers into her lower hip flexor on the right side?‑‑‑that’s what’s recorded, yes. however, if you look closely at the notes there are two different accounts of that from the two police officers. sure. i’m going to take you through both accounts. his honour: i’m sure we’re going to get to them?‑‑‑okay. mr haddock: yes. because neither of them say she touched the vagina, did they?‑‑‑one, i believe, said she – she said he put it on her vagina and the other one recorded she put it in. that’s what she told them. well, at the moment we will just go with the official version. it says:
“he poked the doll in me,” and pushes her fingers into her lower hip flexor on the right side.
now, do you accept that i’m reading that record correctly or do you need me to show it to you?‑‑‑i would like to see that, please. all right. i will show you a document. his honour: just while that’s being dug out. does it follow from this that you, therefore, do not accept the father’s evidence that he doesn’t have and hasn’t had that doll at his house?‑‑‑i don’t accept that evidence, because i am aware that it did go to his house on a few occasions. the doll is a doll that [y] had with her at all times, for quite a few months. it was her favourite.
and you didn’t put anything in your affidavit – i’m not asking what [y] told you – you didn’t put anything in your affidavit at all about what [y] said to the police about the doll didn’t disappear, madam, did you?‑‑‑no, i don’t think i did. so you see that what you did from this police record, when you did your affidavit, is you didn’t give the court the full picture about [y]’s disclosure. do you accept that now?‑‑‑i – i feel like because she’s obviously young and this was a very unusual experience for her that it is obvious that ‑ ‑ ‑ no, madam. i’m asking about your affidavit, not what your explanation for that is?‑‑‑i was just going to – i was just going to say that the – it jumps around a bit, yes, and so ‑ ‑ ‑ and so what you did ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ perhaps quoting ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ when you did your affidavit – i will ask you a different question. i will withdraw that. it’s difficult. what you did when you did your affidavit, because you thought it jumped around, is you put in – you took out anything at all that you might – thought maybe didn’t make sense with the allegation. do you accept that?‑‑‑i don’t know what to say. i believe that i had given – passed on the information that was given to me, that’s – that [y] said. so you passed on the information that was said to you but you had access to the police record and you just didn’t put any of it in the affidavit. that’s the reality, is it?‑‑‑i didn’t quote this in the affidavit, that’s correct, yes.
so i want to go back to 27 august. do you remember i asked you about some disclosures later that night and you said, “no, i think that was the next morning”? i will just read from paragraph 26 of your affidavit:
at bath time that night, [y] voluntarily demonstrated to me how [mr chadwick] pinches the labia and twists it hard. [y] said, “it hurts and is .....”
right. so that would appear to be that night after [y] has just told the police that she doesn’t know what a pinch is, she has never been pinched, but that he pinched her, demonstrating something to you in the bath about pinching, that’s right, isn’t it?‑‑‑that is correct, yes. all right. and she voluntarily demonstrated this to you. that’s your evidence. does that mean that you asked her and she did it voluntarily?‑‑‑no. no. so just out of the blue she just said, “this is what dad does”?‑‑‑when she has made disclosures they are out of the blue. they happen any time. and what we don’t actually have in your affidavit material generally is your reaction when she makes disclosures. do you accept that?‑‑‑i don’t accept that. my – it has been included. i ‑ ‑ ‑ you say in each and every case ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑no. ‑ ‑ ‑ it has been included?‑‑‑no, probably not in every case. right. so let me suggest something to you that you do when [y] makes a disclosure. you comfort her, don’t you?‑‑‑yes, yes. you pay attention to her, don’t you?‑‑‑yes. so that’s what you did this evening in the bath, when [y] is in the bath, correct?‑‑‑i mean, i was bathing her. i wasn’t ‑ ‑ ‑ yes. and she does this, what you say, demonstration ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ about how he pinches the labia and twists it hard. that’s what you say?‑‑‑yes. there’s no description of what any of that means in your affidavit, is there?‑‑‑i’m not sure what you mean. well, you don’t tell us what hand [y] used, do you?‑‑‑no, i can’t recall. right. you don’t tell us what position she is in when this is happening, do you?‑‑‑i don’t think i mentioned that, no. you don’t tell us anything that allows us to understand your value judgment about the twisting being hard in your affidavit, do you?‑‑‑i – i don’t think so. you understood this was a really serious allegation ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑i absolutely understand that. ‑ ‑ ‑ that you were making, didn’t you? right?‑‑‑it’s gut-wrenching to hear your child say these things to you.
mr haddock: just excuse me for one moment, ma’am. so if we think about just those police records that we’ve now gone through which aren’t mentioned in your affidavit for a moment. and [y] says she has never been pinched. there’s every possibility that what [y] said to you about dad pinching her vagina is completely made up, isn’t it?‑‑‑i don’t think that it would be completely made up. i – i feel as though she didn’t probably disclose as much to perfect strangers as she did to me. right. the perfect strangers are the people actually trained to do the interviewing, though, aren’t they, madam?‑‑‑they are. right?‑‑‑and i’m her mother, who she felt safe with. sure. you are her mother. no one is disputing that. we all, i think, understand that. you also know that what she couldn’t tell the police was the difference between a truth and lie?‑‑‑pardon? you know that she couldn’t tell the police that she understood the difference between the truth and a lie?‑‑‑that’s quite common in children that age. no, no, can you just answer my question, not your view about what’s common?‑‑‑okay. do you understand that that’s what she told the police, madam?‑‑‑okay. i understand that.
... just taking you back to your earlier answer, you seem very keen to say that the reason the police didn’t progress with charging the father was the high standard of proof. you know they actually gave you some detailed reasons that went a bit beyond that, don’t you?‑‑‑in our discussion on the day, is that what you’re referring to? no. i’m saying that you’ve been given reasons from the police that are a bit different than just, “we couldn’t reach the standard of proof.” do you accept that?‑‑‑i accept that. right. so, for example, you were told about inconsistencies between what had apparently been disclosed to you and what happened during the record of interview with [y]. you’ve been shown records about that, haven’t you?‑‑‑yes, i think so. right. so, for example, some of the questions that you had been – problems that you have been told was that [y] didn’t tell the police that there had been a penetrative act. you understand that, don’t you?‑‑‑i understand that, but i doubt it’s likely that a child would show them directly what had happened. thank you for sharing that, madam. you answer my question, please. dr behrens will be able to ask you questions later and you can share your opinion about that then. but you also know that it was totally impossible to determine any common proof of time and date. you know that, don’t you?‑‑‑yes, that’s – i – yes, that’s true. right. and that they were concerned about this inconsistency that [y] said that the swimmers don’t cover her crotch. you know they were concerned about that inconsistency as well, don’t you?‑‑‑yes. she didn’t say that to me. i ‑ ‑ ‑ and that [y] only said to the police that she only wears swimmers in the bath and the shower. you know they were concerned about that?‑‑‑i – i mean, i guess so. i ‑ ‑ ‑ yes. and she doesn’t always wear swimmers in the bath and the shower, does she?‑‑‑i don’t know what she wore at her father’s house in the bath. what about at your house, madam?‑‑‑well, no. no, not at my house. she just ‑ ‑ ‑ right?‑‑‑i’m sorry, i wasn’t sure which one you meant. that’s okay. you don’t need to be sorry. i’m just going to ask you another question. and you know that she didn’t say anything to the police about her father’s penis being in her face?‑‑‑yes, i know that. none of that is in your affidavit either, is there?‑‑‑i don’t believe it is, no, not that detail. your honour, for your reference, i’m going through page 7 of the tender bundle. his honour: thank you. mr haddock: and, for example, what you also don’t put in your affidavit is your expression of distress about the fact that [mr chadwick] wasn’t going to be charged at the police station. you were distressed about that. and that’s not mentioned in your affidavit, is it?‑‑‑i can’t recall if i put that in there, i’m sorry. well, let me read this for you:   chadwick] was visibly distressed at the outcome, stating that [mr chadwick] keeps breaking the law and getting away with it.
?‑‑‑yes, i remember that and it relates to the amount of times he had breached orders. i think we’re up to about 40. thank you. i will ask you questions about why you said it in a moment. and you also told the police you were disappointed with the outcome. that’s what you said, wasn’t it?‑‑‑yes, that’s correct, because my child was distressed. his honour: no, no, no. no. sorry. again, i will give you the advice that i gave [mr chadwick]. everything will go much quicker if at all possible you give a yes or a no answer?‑‑‑okay. and if there’s something else that you wish to say, it’s likely that one of the other people who’ve been asking questions over the last day or so will do so. okay?‑‑‑i understand. sorry. sorry, your honour. no, no, no. mr haddock: and you know that one of the things that [y] told the police is that she hadn’t told anyone about being with dad in the shower. you know she told the police that?‑‑‑yes, i remember that, yes. right. so that would mean that she speaks to you about it in the morning and then tells the police that she hasn’t spoken to anyone. that’s what that must mean, correct?‑‑‑yes, there were ‑ ‑ ‑ so she’s either lying to you or she’s lying to the police, isn’t she?‑‑‑i don’t believe it’s lying. i believe that she was trying to process and tell people what she recalled. right. so it’s a bit hard, though, to understand how, when you’re trying to process, you say one thing to one person and you say the completely opposite thing to the other person. you would agree with that, wouldn’t you?‑‑‑but a four year old, like, trying to place time and day and that sort of thing is very difficult for them. and if it was about time or day, madam, you might have a point, but that’s not what we’re talking about, is it. talking about her being in the shower with her father. that’s what we’re ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ talking about, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes ‑ ‑ ‑ okay. so the time and date excuse doesn’t work. let’s try this again. you accept, don’t you, that one of the two versions of events [y] said, one to you, one to the police, one can’t be true? do you accept that?‑‑‑i think there’s more to it than that. do you. because what we don’t see is your affidavit anything about you thinking there’s more to it than that, do we, because you don’t explain that it happened?‑‑‑i believe in my affidavit that i said i hoped there was another explanation. yes. but what you didn’t do was give any detail about the plain inconsistency between what [y] said to you and what [y] said to the police. that’s right, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes. because you were very careful not to point out in any way, shape or form that there were any inconsistencies in the disclosure of 27 august at all when you did your affidavit, weren’t you?‑‑‑that’s – i wasn’t trying to be careful to do that at all. i was trying to report the facts. do you accept that the effect of what you’ve done is to give quite a misleading picture about what was said to the police ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑no, i don’t.
his honour: so what happened between the morning and going to the police in the afternoon?‑‑‑i was mainly on the phone and reporting to cyps and following the process i was instructed to follow with [at health unit] as well, and also arranging the appointment for sacat to speak with her, because that was the first part of the process i was instructed to follow. and i assume mr haddock will get to it, but i’m – so i’m not trying to get too too far ahead – is it your understand that the [at health unit] ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ that there was no physical evidence found of abuse?‑‑‑that’s right. no injuries, nothing, correct?‑‑‑there was – they were – they didn’t recommend doing a forensic examination at that time, because 10 days had already passed since she had been in her father’s care, that’s what they had said. and they said that they didn’t want to put her through that unless they felt there was a need to, and they would potentially do a forensic examination later, which they did in the following days. but there was no evidence of any injuries?‑‑‑no – not at that time, no. not at any time?‑‑‑i said not at that time. were there injuries ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑she – she complained – not on that day. later on, after being in her father’s care – sorry, the weekend that she had been in her father’s care and the one prior, she had complained of discomfort in her vagina area. she was observed to be pulling at her underwear, and she was unable to sit comfortably or settle. yes, but – sorry, but that’s all very different to there being evidence from say [at health unit] that they discovered, or they saw, they found, physical injury of any kind, correct?‑‑‑yes, no forensic examination was done the day she was interviewed. but at no stage – please correct me if i’m wrong from your understanding, but at no stage has there been ever any finding by any medical or any other examiner of any physical injury, correct?‑‑‑correct. right. thank you. mr haddock: and in fact let’s just talk about 27 august and the flare up of the vagina, because it’s also not mentioned in your affidavit. i will just read to you from the police record:
the police also confirm that [mr chadwick] had not had access to the children for 10 days and that wetness and itchiness experienced by [y] had been intermittent, first started some time before the last time [y] was with [mr chadwick]. further, it had flared up again sometime in the last 10 days whilst [y] was in [ms chadwick]’s care, however, had currently settled.
now, just accepting that that’s what the police record says, there’s nothing at all in your affidavit about this flaring up in your care in that 10 days prior, is there?‑‑‑there – i did mention that i had – because, again, i was hoping there was another explanation – i did mention that there was – i wondered about if she had been wiping herself incorrectly and hadn’t – and that caused some redness and discomfort. but ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑and so ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ you don’t believe that’s the cause of the redness and discomfort now, do you?‑‑‑i – i need you to understand i’m in a really difficult position here. i need you to answer my question here, could you do so, please?‑‑‑i – i find it hard to believe there is another explanation, given what she has disclosed and how she has been suffering for the last 12 months. thank you. his honour: so you think that a four-year-old or a five-year-old is able to give the graphic descriptions in the level of detail that she has?‑‑‑yes, the detail that has been reported is exactly what she has told me, they are her words. mr haddock: what you also didn’t tell his honour at any point is that what [y] told the police was that after she had been poked with the doll and the doll didn’t disappear, that her father called the police?‑‑‑yes, i did say that. i don’t ‑ ‑ ‑ yes, and it’s not in your affidavit, is it?‑‑‑no, it is not. right. so what [y] actually described on your evidence was her father sexually abusing her but then he called the police, that’s what that must describe, mustn’t it, in your version of events?‑‑‑no – can you say that again, please? i don’t understand. i will start that again: you say that you believe that when we talk about [y] being poked with a doll that is [mr chadwick] poking the doll into her vagina, correct?‑‑‑that is what she said, yes. or at least part of it – right, well, that may be what she said, that’s what you believe happened, correct?‑‑‑yes. right. what she said about that to the police was immediately afterwards, or after that, “dad called the police”, correct?‑‑‑that’s what she said, yes. right. now, the first question is: there’s nothing at all about that in your affidavit, is there?‑‑‑no. does it not seem a little bit strange to you that if the father is sexually abusing your daughter that he would then immediately afterwards get on the phone and call the police?‑‑‑yes, it does seem very strange. and it’s about as strange as that disclosure [y] makes of other people being in the house and her father yelling at her that he has to hold her penis, which is in your august affidavit. his honour: i think it was the “she” doing the holding. mr haddock: she has to hold. does that not seem a little strange to you, there’s other people in the house and he’s apparently yelling out, “you have to hold my penis”?‑‑‑yes, but because ‑ ‑ ‑ it’s inherently unlikely, isn’t it, madam?‑‑‑i suppose it’s unlikely, yes, but i reported and did the best i could for my child ‑ ‑ ‑ that’s – sure, madam. i’m not ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ exactly as she told me. ... ... you don’t complain anywhere in any of your affidavits about [y] showing you any cuts to her vaginal area, that’s not in any affidavit material, is it?‑‑‑cuts? cuts?‑‑‑i don’t remember her showing me cuts. well, you ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑she did show me some redness. sure, and i’ve asked you about cuts, that’s a different thing?‑‑‑i’m sorry, sorry. so you don’t remember any cuts?‑‑‑no. i didn’t look inside her vagina. well, you have previously examined her vaginal area, haven’t you?‑‑‑she – when she was ‑ ‑ ‑ that’s in your evidence, you’ve done that, correct?‑‑‑when she has complained it being sore and red, yes. sure. i will take you to the example?‑‑‑okay. so the answer to my question is, “yes.” so just thinking about that, you’ve said at least seven times that i can identify, and you describe the doll seven times in your affidavit as having sharp – “the sharp, white-tailed doll”, that’s how you describe it, correct?‑‑‑yes. so would you accept then that if at any point there has been an insertion of this doll into the vagina, there would have been some physical evidence of it being inserted, do you accept that or not?‑‑‑i do accept that. right?‑‑‑however, she didn’t make disclosures until 10 days after the event may have occurred, so ‑ ‑ ‑ right. but you also say that this happened more than once, that’s what you say, correct, madam?‑‑‑based on what she had told me i could only try to understand how and when this sort of thing may have happened. i – i mean, obviously i don’t know for sure, and i’ve been guided by what [y] has disclosed to me, and also the redness and the discomfort and pain that she was talking – that she told me about, and that i observed. just unpacking your answer, which has strayed a bit beyond my question: you don’t know for sure, but you believe her disclosures, is that what your evidence is?‑‑‑can you please restate the question? i don’t know for sure what ‑ ‑ ‑ sure. i’m just trying to understand your answer, because you said “obviously i don’t know for sure”?‑‑‑okay. so what i’m trying to understand is is your position actually, “i don’t know for sure whether these things actually occurred, but i believe that [y] was sexually abused by her father”, is that what your position is?‑‑‑no. my position is that i ‑ ‑ ‑ thank you. his honour: sorry, you can tell me what you – what you say your position is?‑‑‑pardon? his honour: you can tell me what you were just about to say to mr haddock?‑‑‑i guess i was just trying to explain that i didn’t know for sure when the events had occurred that she talked about. when the events occurred, right. so you believe the events occurred, you just don’t know when?‑‑‑well, i believe that an experience must have happened for [y] to be making these types of disclosures, and for her to have complained about being sore and, you know, itching and having redness, i was concerned. but i also was not leaping to conclusions, i was asking if she had been wiping herself correctly, and i did take her to the doctor to ask them to check to see if everything was okay. she did a uti test and she was checked various other things, because [y] has also been complaining of tummy discomfort. so the gp did an examination as soon as this was done?‑‑‑no, she didn’t – she didn’t do an examination, because she recorded the disclosures [y] made to her at that appointment, and she felt if an examination was done it would be best for that to be conducted by [at health unit], which it was, in the days afterwards. mr haddock: so you went to the gp in fact on – which is [dr u], and ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑that’s correct. ‑ ‑ ‑ that was in september, correct?‑‑‑that’s correct. and what you did when you went to the gp is you first met with the gp and described the disclosures as you understood them, that’s what happened as the first part of that appointment, wasn’t it?‑‑‑i can’t recall the order that things happened, but there was a part where [y] was talking with the doctor and making – and explaining her disclosures, and there was also another part where the doctor sought additional information from me, and [y] was – yes, playing ‑ ‑ ‑ [y] was in the room when you did that, wasn’t she?‑‑‑she was playing in a different – like an area close by, yes. right. so she could have heard what you told the doctor, correct?‑‑‑i – i find it unlikely because we were very – speaking very softly, but it’s possible. right. and [y] also showed the doll to the doctor on your evidence, correct?‑‑‑she did, as i mentioned. she ‑ ‑ ‑ so as i try to understand your evidence then, you believe that [y] has been penetrated by [mr chadwick] with this doll in her vaginal area, correct?‑‑‑correct. and yet she’s still quite happy, it appears, to take the doll to people and show them the doll, is that – is that right, have i understood that right?‑‑‑i did find that very unusual. however, i haven’t experienced this before ‑ ‑ ‑ ... his honour: just focus: “yes, no”?‑‑‑sorry, your honour. mr haddock: is that right, she’s quite happy to have the doll and show the doll to people?‑‑‑she was for a period of time afterwards, yes, she has since rejected it.
let me suggest to you something, see if you agree with it: if [mr chadwick] had sexually abused [y] using this doll, wouldn’t he have been careful to be absolutely certain it was thrown away and not going back to you?‑‑‑yes, i suppose so, isn’t that what was happening in that disclosure? and what you don’t tell us in relation to this disclosure at all is anything at all about how you asked [x], or how [x] confirmed, this incident supposedly occurred about being dropped into the outside bin before handover?‑‑‑i can’t ‑ ‑ ‑ you don’t tell us that, do you?‑‑‑no, i don’t think so. did you do that deliberately?‑‑‑no. ... mr haddock: were you not worried – you talk about flashbacks and nightmares, were you not worried that the possession of this item that you say had been used to sexually abuse your daughter might trigger some ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑yes. ‑ ‑ ‑ concerning memories for her?‑‑‑yes, i absolutely was worried about that. so how ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: but ‑ ‑ ‑ mr haddock: ‑ ‑ ‑ could you allow yourself ‑ ‑ ‑ his honour: yes. mr haddock: ‑ ‑ ‑ to be in a position that you don’t know where the doll is now, madam?‑‑‑she stopped playing with it and she has put it away somewhere. his honour: she has put it away?‑‑‑yes, i’ve let y decide what she wanted to do, it was her favourite toy. ... you would accept that if what you say is true, this doll would be a very important piece of evidence, wouldn’t it?‑‑‑yes, it would be, i suppose. his honour: so you didn’t think that it was necessary to try to protect [y] from playing with this instrument of abuse when you learnt of it?‑‑‑i did – i did think it was important to protect her from that, and i was surprised that she ‑ ‑ ‑ yes – no, and i’m asking what did you do then in order to protect her?‑‑‑i did put it aside, because i thought that she probably wouldn’t want to play with it, but then she asked to play with it, and i was surprised that she did want to. so then obviously i wanted to allow my child to choose what she felt comfortable with. and ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑i admit it is odd that she was still comfortable with it. i – i haven’t been in this position before. i ‑ ‑ ‑ no, no one is suggesting that ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑i don’t think there’s a rule book. no one is suggesting any of that – no one. but “odd”, could i suggest, is one of many appropriate words as to [y] says, “this was the instrument that was used to do this to me, but i’m going to keep playing with the doll, because i’m relaxed and comfortable about playing with it”, you understand?‑‑‑i do understand.
mr haddock: at paragraph 30 of your affidavit you talk about another disclosure which happens in the morning of 27 august 2021, but this one happens in the car on the way to sacat for the interview, so we’ve jumped around a little bit in your affidavit, i just want to be clear this is now in the morning again on 27 august, after 7.30 am, but before the sacat interview, whenever that was. and you say that:
she told me in the car on the way to the sacat unit for interview that [mr chadwick] said to her, “your vagina is so soft.” [y] volunteered this information while we were driving to the police station because i had said to her, “we’re going to talk to the police so they can help us.”
mr haddock: in paragraph 33 of your affidavit you talk about some disclosures that you say that [y] made to you on the way to the doctor in september 2021. and you say to [y], “we’re going to get your tummy checked out because you’ve been saying it is sore and i want to make sure you’re okay.” so at least we know the explanation that you gave to [y] had nothing to do with her vagina, correct?‑‑‑yes, i suppose so, yes. and you say that, “ [y] disclosed much more detail to me.” you say ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑that day. “when” – this is a quote:
“when i’m in bed with dad he’s naked too, he always takes my clothes off. his penis is poking out.” i asked, “does daddy want you to do anything with his penis?”
now, that’s what you said, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes, that’s correct. i want to suggest first to you that it’s incredible to think that [y] would volunteer to you, in response to saying, “we’re taking you to the doctor about your tummy being sore,” that when she’s in bed with dad he’s naked too and takes off her clothes and his penis is poking out, do you agree that’s an incredible thing for her to say?‑‑‑no, i don’t, and the doctor at [at health unit] had said to me that disclosures will happen any time and to be ‑ ‑ ‑ sure. you hadn’t been to [at health unit] in september had you?‑‑‑no, i hadn’t, but she was ‑ ‑ ‑ no, so we can’t – we can’t right now talk about the doctor at [at health unit], let’s just talk about september. so what you say is, “does daddy want you to do anything with his penis?” do you see the problem with asking y that question?‑‑‑yes, i do. it’s a leading question, isn’t it?‑‑‑i understand, yes, it is. and if you ask a question like that she’s hardly going to say, “nothing,” is she?‑‑‑i suppose because it was another disclosure i was trying to understand if there was another explanation and why that was happening. well, you weren’t trying to get any other explanation when you said something like, “does daddy want you to do anything with his penis?” were you, madam?‑‑‑i was hoping that she would say, “no.” was she meant to say anything other than yes when you put the question that way, think about it?‑‑‑i admit it does seem like that, and that’s not – that was not my intention. there’s no acknowledgement of that anywhere in your affidavit, is there?‑‑‑i don’t think so. and you say then that she made a gesture about him putting the penis in her hands with her hands held out like a catcher’s mitt?‑‑‑yes. how would she demonstrate the penis then, madam, if her hand is held out like a catcher’s mitt?‑‑‑demonstrate the penis? yes?‑‑‑she was showing me that this is what she did. you say, “she nodded and gestured that [mr chadwick] puts his penis in her hands, and then she put them out like a catcher’s mitt”?‑‑‑she had to do that, that’s what she told me. so for the record the witness is holding both hands in a parallel manner together in a cupping motion. so how does she then gesture the [mr chadwick] putting the penis in her hands if she’s holding her hands like that, how does that happen?‑‑‑i don’t know. she was sort of like that, well, i don’t know how else to explain. do you think maybe that there might have been a gesture that you’ve decided has a sinister connotation that doesn’t?‑‑‑no, i don’t think so. right. you say, “ [y] then said, ‘i had to touch it, he smells like stinky old cheese,’” and you asked her where the smell came from. now, you don’t put that in quotes, that bit, “i asked her where the smell came from”, is that because you don’t remember precisely what you asked [y]?‑‑‑no, it’s because when i’ve had to record these disclosures i’ve been in an extremely distressed state. it’s gut wrenching when a child discloses to you and you have to process it, and my first priority ‑ ‑ ‑ yes?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ was to comfort her, and then i had to remember and like record and pass on what was said. sure. so is it a direct quote, yes or no?‑‑‑yes.
well, what you then said, when we – yes, “it was gross.” i said, “ooh.”: i asked her what happened then, and she said, “he wiped some of [ms r’s] washing on it.” didn’t that seem incredible to you, if you were thinking that was about [mr chadwick] ejaculating?‑‑‑not exactly. you don’t think it a bit unlikely that [mr chadwick] would make [y] hold his penis, ejaculate and then wipe his ejaculent up with some of his father’s partner’s underwear, do you? you don’t think that’s very unlikely?‑‑‑when we were together he used to wipe his ejaculate on anything that was near him. none of that is in your affidavit, is it?‑‑‑no, that specific part isn’t. no. we’re just making it up as we go along now, madam, aren’t we, when we realise there’s a problem?‑‑‑absolutely not, no, no way. these are disclosures from [y] directly to me. yes, and my question to you is about do you not find the suggestion that he ejaculated and then wiped it with his father’s partner’s underwear inherently incredible? you don’t seem to be able to accept that, is that right?‑‑‑i don’t see why it’s incredible that he ‑ ‑ ‑ no, you don’t?‑‑‑ ‑ ‑ ‑ wiped it on something nearby. well, you have no idea whether it was nearby or not, because [y] didn’t give you any of that detail, did she?‑‑‑no. i’m assuming it was, i don’t know. that’s precisely what – you’ve made a series of assumptions about this, haven’t you?‑‑‑no, i don’t think that’s a fair thing to say. you ask [y], “does daddy do anything to his penis to make that happen?” do you see the problem with that question?‑‑‑yes. hardly likely to say no, is she?‑‑‑i was – i wanted [y] to speak for herself and tell me what she had experienced. ... are you seriously suggesting that when you said, “does daddy do anything with his penis to make that happen?” that’s you trying to ask a question in an open way?‑‑‑yes. and you said to – you then say:
she then – she imitated him pushing down on his penis again and again with his hand wrapped around it.
you don’t describe that imitation in any detail anywhere in that part of the affidavit, do you?‑‑‑i can’t remember. she did – i did describe how she had shown me what was going on, she did this. for the record the witness has held both her hands together, clasped, with one fist matching the other perfectly, and moving it up and down 10 centimetres up and down. your honour, i’m just going to finish this part of the topic and then i will conclude. his honour: thank you. mr haddock: what you said to [y] was, “i’m so sorry he did that, it’s not okay that he hurt or scared you, and he did the wrong thing with your body”, that’s what you said to [y], wasn’t it?‑‑‑yes, that’s correct. now, do you see the problems with the things you’ve communicated to [y] in that sentence?‑‑‑yes, i can see that you’re saying that they’re leading. let’s go – no, let’s go one by one: “i’m so sorry he did that to you”. so you’ve accepted to [y] that this actually happened, that’s right, isn’t it?‑‑‑yes. so it would follow on from that that if [y] tells you that’s not true, she might think there’s a possibility she would get in trouble, correct?‑‑‑no. no? okay. and then: “it’s not okay that he hurt or scared you.” now, just thinking about that, [y] hadn’t said anything at all about her father hurting her or scaring her on that particular occasion, had she?‑‑‑no. so you communicated to her that what her father had done was hurt her, correct?‑‑‑yes, perhaps that was ‑ ‑ ‑ and you communicated to her that he did the wrong thing with her body?‑‑‑yes. [y] asked, “will he go to jail? i just want him to go with no food so he dies.” and all you tell us is, “i comforted [y]”?‑‑‑yes. i didn’t respond to that – again, i just didn’t ‑ ‑ ‑ how would you not respond verbally to your little girl wishing her father was dead?‑‑‑my child was telling me that her father had ejaculated near her, and had forced her to hold his penis. well, she was telling you nothing about being forced to hold his penis, she doesn’t say anything about being forced, does she, on your interpretation?‑‑‑i’m sorry if i’ve added a word. she doesn’t say anything at all about him ejaculating. she describes something that you’ve assumed is ejaculating in paragraph 33, correct?‑‑‑she described this stinky old cheese coming out of his penis in the shape of a ghost. yes, and you – yes, and she doesn’t say it’s liquid, does she?‑‑‑no. she doesn’t say it’s sticky, does she?‑‑‑she – i thought she said something about it being sticky or “ooh”, something like that. yes, well, it’s not in your affidavit she said “ooh,” so it’s not about that. so you’ve assumed that what that is is ejaculent, correct?‑‑‑yes. that’s an assumption you have made, correct?‑‑‑because a five – or four-year-old would not understand what was happening. and you’ve assumed that her understanding of what was happening is that there was ejaculent, correct?‑‑‑that was what seemed to be the logical explanation. now, that was – whatever it was, that was the explanation you adopted. so just thinking about that – well, we will turn to my question: why wouldn’t you say something to your little girl who is wishing her father dead?‑‑‑she was in distress and she was telling me these things had happened to her. i was still in shock, like i’ve said, and i don’t – i don’t know if you believe that or not, but i was, and my priority was her comfort and trying to calm her and make her feel safe. i suggest to you, madam, that’s not true, because i will read to you the next bit. so you talk about being shocked and thinking about what your priority was about comforting her, but the very next thing you say is, “ [y] said, ‘i said stop and i don’t like it, but he didn’t listen,’” and you say, “i asked her what happened afterwards.” so you’re trying to get further information about the disclosure there by asking that question, aren’t you?‑‑‑yes, i was.
so if you answer my question about what you knew from 27 august. you knew from 27 august that [y] had spoken about multiple pointy dolls. you knew that, didn’t you?---i had – yes, i think so. all right. and that’s why you decided you wanted to clear this up. because the only doll she told the police about was [the doll], correct?---that is correct. right. so what you were trying to do, i want to suggest to you, is fix the ambiguity between what you say she told you on the morning of 27 august and what she told the police. that’s what you’re trying to do here on 17 september, isn’t it?---no, that is not what i was trying to do. and here we have the evolution of the [doll] allegation, because instead of the pointy parts of the tail, it becomes about the arms, correct?---that is what [y] said. all right?---yes. and what she says here, if we look at this:
also the arms as well, in where the wee comes out.
so did you understand that to mean that also arms as well as going into the vagina on this doll?---no, i don’t think that’s what she said. i think – i’ll let you - - - so?--- - - - continue. i’ll keep going with this affidavit then, because you say she gestured whilst clothed, or while clothed, with the doll, using the sharp tiny arm to poke her clitoris area. madam, if she’s clothed, how on earth can you tell where the arm is supposed to be pointing?---she talked about where the wee comes out, and that was my understanding. that that is the area that she was referring to. all right. well, you actually say something a bit different, because what you say in your affidavit after that is she gestures while clothed, using this doll to poke into her clitoris area. that’s quite different from, “my understanding was on the basis of saying that’s where the wee came out”, you accept that?---yes. and you with the bail further down inside her vagina. how do you say she demonstrates that while she’s clothed?---she wasn’t going – she just did a general gesture. i don’t know how to - - - so your evidence?--- - - - explain that. - - - here is quite different from saying she just did a general gesture. do you accept that?---i mean, yes. so is this an example that we see here of where you were careful to give his honour the full picture or not?---i have simply recorded everything [y] said to me, and passed it on as in real time. that’s – i did what i could to protect my child and to understand what she was telling me. at paragraph – just, sorry, bear with me one moment. when you say that she – i withdraw that. hang on. how did you account for this child, who you’ve earlier – about six paragraphs earlier say has an excellent memory, suddenly adding on that the arms were involved with the doll? how do you account for that?---that she added information? yes?---that that – i mean, i just explained that i reported what she told me.
mr haddock: i hope it’s the right page ..... 61. now, i’d just like you to look down the page and you can see here on 22 september 2021 there’s an email to you from [ms w] at [....].au?---yes. you see what’s written there is:
thank you, [ms chadwick]. i’ve passed on your two latest emails to [ms z] from sacat. i know it’s hard and you’re in a position where you want [y] to be able to talk to you and to be supported, but just be mindful of what the doctor at [at health unit] said about not bringing it up.
now - - -?---yes. does that help you remember that the doctors at [at health unit] told you not to bring up - - -?---yes. -?---yes. -?---yes. -?---yes. -?---yes. -?---yes. - issues of sexual abuse with [y] yes. right. and so you ignored that advice absolutely completely on 17 september 2021, didn’t you?
sure, but with the – well, i don’t think your evidence is seriously that she yelled out in her sleep, “and dad had big [animals] and he was telling them to hurt me and eat me up”. she didn’t yell that in her sleep, did she?---no. you’re right. right. in fact, this is a conversation you have after she has woken up. correct?---yes. that’s correct. all right. my question to you was you’ve given a lot of evidence about deciding things she said about her father that are negative are flashbacks. i’m asking you do you really think that this example of the [animal], that can’t be a flashback, can it?---no. i believe it was a bad dream. that’s what she woke up saying. yes. no. so do you accept the proposition that there are things that [y] says to you about her father after she has been asleep that may be dreams as opposed to flashbacks? do you accept that’s possible?---yes. i do accept that. yes. his honour: so where do you, and in turn where do i draw the line? is it only the sexual stuff that are flashbacks and, therefore, i’m meant to take those as her belief and your belief. where do i draw the line? where do you draw the line?---i suppose that when she is – has disclosed certain things – when she has started talking about things, she has called them nightmares or bad dreams. but, then, with further detail, if she’s talking about something that she says he did, that’s where we – we draw the line because sometimes she has woken up saying she was dreaming and then has gone into more detailed information, saying things that happened. so it – i – i understand what you’re saying. it is very hard to know where to draw the line. i do see that. thank you. mr haddock: can you have a look at paragraph 45 for me, please? now, what i want to suggest to you, if you just look at the last bit, this is one of many examples in your affidavit where [y] says something really negative about her dad and you don’t tell us what you said to her. do you accept that?---yes. right. and, in fact, it’s rather typical, i suggest to you, throughout your affidavit that [y] says things about her dad hurting her and wanting her dad dead and you don’t tell us what you said to [y] after she said that. do you accept that?---yes. i do accept that. all right. and so, for example, in this instance, she’s talking about hurting her father physically, isn’t she?---yes. and you don’t appear on your affidavit to have counselled her that maybe she shouldn’t think about physically hurting her father? it’s not there, is it?---no. it’s not there. no. his honour: does she actually have any ninja skills?---no. it’s her, you know, standing a - - - something made up?--- - - - certain and playing around. yes. mr haddock: it’s her being creative, isn’t it?---i suppose you could call it that. it’s more likely a game or something she’s - - - it’s her being inventive, isn’t it?---yes, could be. so if it’s about the ninja skills, it’s inventive, but if it’s negative about her father and abusing her, she can’t possibly have invented it. that’s your position, isn’t it?---no. that’s not correct. these things have happened continuously at bed time where she seems to recall these awful things.
that’s your opinion of [mr chadwick] and you still seriously say to his honour that you’re going to make every second weekend alternate time work, on your proposal. you’re seriously asserting you’re going to make that work?---i will do whatever is best for the children and i do genuinely – i genuinely acknowledge the outcome from cyps. i acknowledge they were unable to determine whether the sexual abuse had occurred or not. and even after [mr chadwick] sexually assaulted me, i was able to continue the shared care arrangement, despite my suffering and trauma. i did put that aside and i am still dealing with that and still having counselling to process it and heal from it. and i was able to do it then. so if i can overcome that and still allow the children - - - okay. you didn’t disclose the sexual assault to anyone at all, including your psychologist until you put it in your court documents later in the proceedings. correct?---that is correct. so it’s not in your notice of risk when the proceedings commenced, for example, is it?---i can’t recall at the moment. okay. and it’s not in any of your psychologist’s notes, up until you disclosed to the court, is it?---no. i don’t think it is. i felt unsafe in the household with him and i didn’t feel - - -
do you? all right. and she said:
‘i just hided under the blanket’, and curled up two hands under her eyes showing how she peeped out over the blanket, scared. ‘the gooey rotten cheese went on [ms b]. [ms b] was naked. and dad was naked. i could see his penis, gesturing masturbation.’
whatever that means:
‘he made me hold it’, and said – she imitated, in his loud, angry voice – ‘hold my penis or you will never sleep in my bed again.’
so are you seriously suggesting that you believe [ms b] is there, naked, her father is naked and her father is yelling at [y], “hold my penis or you will never sleep in my bed again”? you serious think that happened?---that is what [y] told me. i understand you say that’s what [y] told you. my question is totally different. do you seriously believe that happened?---i believe there’s an explanation or something has happened, but - - - sure. but what she has - - - his honour: and what do you think that is?---well, it – it is possible that they were engaged in a sexual act and [y] was also in the bed. i don’t know. she said it. and that’s what i reported. well, is there any circumstance where anything that [y] says, that your steadfast belief in the accuracy and truthfulness of [y]’s accounts, will ever be challenged at all?---it is already being challenged. i – i’ve done anything i can to protect my child. yes. sorry?---i just - - - please, my question is anything – does anything ever challenge your steadfast belief in [y]’s account of everything that she says?---i – yes, things do challenge it because she was a four-year-old when she said these things. i acknowledge that children that are that young can mix things up and, potentially, put things together. but the frequency and the graphicness of these accounts. they don’t leave much to the imagination?---no, that – you can understand my concern. i get it but hence my question. your steadfast belief in [y]’s account of everything?---yes, i do believe her. i do. but i think there’s still part - - - but the probability of a number of these things though - - -?---yes. - - - against the steadfast and clear denials – the consistent denials – of both the father, but also of [ms b] - - -?---but he’s also denied - - - - plus all the comments – plus also the comments from care and protection, sacat, [at health unit] – but you’re unwavering it seems?--- [y] has disclosed to other people as well, including the doctor and sacat and cyps in various ways, and her trauma counsellor, so it goes both ways.
his honour: can i ask you this – and i’m sorry. this is going back a little bit, but it takes up one of the other questions from the annexure. this is page 60 from your exhibit book. so this is where, again – and mr haddock has taken you to this. so this is an email to [ms z] from you on 7 january 2022. so have you got that?---yes. thank you. yes. so it’s a section just above the part that mr haddock took you to, and you’ve reported she went on to say – sorry. this is also in circumstances where you also say that the grandfather and [ms r] are in the house. correct?---yes, correct. and you record [y] saying – this is approximately in the middle of the para. she went on to say:
it went everywhere, and it looked the shape of a ghost, like the other time. it stunk out the whole house.
well, just in one aspect, do you think it’s probable – is it likely if the grandparents are in the house, and this alleged stink is going everywhere, that all of that’s really likely to have happened?---no. i accept that it’s – it – it is possible that that’s not quite correct. not quite correct?---well, yes. i feel like - - - okay. well, we will add that to one column of maybe not quite correct. okay. thank you.
... but your entire position is that to this day you believe he was engaging in grooming behaviours in relation to [x]. correct?---i do believe that. that’s what she told me. all right. so, just thinking about that, if he’s going to be grooming --- his honour: sorry. that’s what she told you. correct?---yes. that’s what you just said, yes?--- [x] told me what he had been doing. she didn’t use the word “grooming”, if that’s what you mean. no. right. well ..... that’s what you - - -?---sorry. that’s – no. she did not say “grooming”. mr haddock: so, just thinking about that, your case is that you believe he was grooming [x], yet he engaged in behaviour such as denying her ice cream. that’s what you’re saying, isn’t it?---yes. it was a punishment. do you not see the problem with that?---i don’t – i don’t know how people that do these things work. i – all i know is what they’ve reported to me. how can i make - - his honour: but doesn’t that response mean or confirm again what i will call your base proposition, that you believe [mr chadwick] to be a paedophile? correct?---from – yes. and therefore any action is seen through that lens?---i am still able to see the good in him and the things that – you know, his good qualities and that sort of thing. i am still able to see past it. i’ve had to, especially because of the family violence directed at me, like i mentioned. sorry. because of the what?---family violence directed at me. right. so i’m sorry, but i’m just logically struggling a bit of how you would describe someone as a good paedophile?---i don’t think that that’s possible.
and you see this is a conversation you talk about that you had with [x] – sorry – [y], a conversation you had with [y] on 21 march 2022. [y] says to you:
i was scared that dad would come in here and hurt my vagina again.
now, that’s what was said to you. correct?---yes. now, even though you ’ve had this conversation with [at health unit], you say, “what do you think he would do?” that’s what you say to [y], isn’t it?---yes. so you question her to try to get more information, don’t you?---i was trying to understand what she was scared of. you question her to try to get more information, don’t you?---yes. all right. and that’s not about comforting her, is it, asking that question?---i was concerned for my child, because she was telling me, her seam of her pyjamas coming undone - - - madam, we’ve read the paragraph. you are not answering my question. it is important that you answer my question, otherwise i might ask his honour to form a view about why you’re choosing not to answer it?---i’m sorry. no, don’t be sorry. i’m just being fair in trying to tell you this. so i will ask it again. i don’t pretend to think that this is easy for you. okay? so i will just ask it again. if we look at what you said to [y], “what do you think he would do”, that’s about you trying to get information, not comfort her, isn’t it?---yes. okay.
mr haddock: so if we think about the size of the tail of the doll and that this action could now suddenly be going in and out of the vagina, it’s pretty plainly impossible, isn’t it, madam?---it’s not plainly impossible. okay. you can’t accept that that’s impossible?---i – what she said and what she described and, like, gestured could be both. could be both. do you understand precisely what the anatomical reference to vagina is a reference to?---the inside. the inner part of the tube?---yes. i’m aware. all right. and so your position seriously is that something of the width of the tail of this doll could be inserted both in and out and from side to side?---with a lot of damage caused, probably, yes. that’s what i was concerned about. yes. and that’s why you put so much emphasis on the idea of this tail being sharp. correct?---i put emphasis on it because look at it. that’s what she said to me. yes. and there would be a lot of damage, wouldn’t there?---i – that’s what i think, yes. there’s no evidence anywhere of her ever complaining about the sort of damage that would be there, madam, is there?---that’s not true. she did complain of being very sore. she - - -
his honour: can i ask you this, though: some of this was touched on yesterday, but in relation to the doll if it was used in the violent penetrative way that it’s described, is it really plausible that [y] would be happy and relaxed to keep playing with it?---i – i know what you’re saying. i had concerns as well that she was still - - - but it doesn’t seem to alter your steadfast belief. and the second related question is did you ever challenge – even ask, say, at the [at health unit] meeting that an implement of this size could be used in the way that’s described in a child of this age?---no, i didn’t. at that point it was – i don’t know how detailed her disclosures had been about it at that point. i don’t think that that information had come to light yet. but i’m just wondering in your own mind – you know, she’s four years old, right?---yes. and the size of that doll – is that seriously going to be able to be used in the way that - - -?---well, that was my concern and i – i don’t – i’m horrified to think if that happened. right. but my question’s more just even physiologically is it possible and, further, if it was used in that way – again, as mr haddock asked – it would surely leave such significant injuries to a child of this age. but it would seem nothing to see here?---i – it’s not nothing to see here. i can only go by what she told me and i – i’ve done everything i can to keep her safe and protect her because she has only said these things - - - no. no, you have told me that umpteen times?---i know. i understand that. but my question is more physiologically and logically and something of that size be used in the way that [y] described in a child of that age?---yes. well, i – it makes me want to vomit thinking about it and - - - yes. well, no, it’s – try as best you can. how could that fit into a child of that age?---i don’t know. depending on the angle, i guess. she did say that there was a lot of force and twisting. i don’t – i’m not sure.
okay. now, annexure a [image removed] then appears at page 13 and this is a fresh disclosure where you say that [y] disclosed she felt – she was asleep, but then i felt him poke me with his penis. now, that’s part of that disclosure there in the third paragraph, isn’t it?---i can’t see where it says she’s asleep. i’m sorry. okay. well, i will read it out. it says – paragraph starts:
dad pretended to sleep next to me.
you go to the end of that sentence. the next sentence is:
he was naked.
the sentence continues on:
i was asleep, but then i felt him poke me with his penis.
do you see that?---okay. yes. okay. so doesn’t appear to be any information about how, if she was asleep, she could tell she was being poked with a penis, is there?---no. there is no – that – that’s correct. all right. now, when you look at the next paragraph, she says:
he rolled over and put his penis to me. he said, “this is the signal that you have to hold it.”
and, again, despite all times past and the warning, you asked for further detail, correct?---yes. i – i thought it was odd that she would make - - - and then you asked for more detail, yet again. she says:
yes. he told me that was the signal, and i had to hold his penis. i asked if he explained what signal means.
so you asked for further detail, didn’t you?---yes. i did. all right. so just thinking about that disclosure, do you believe that happened?---i do believe it. yes. and including that bit at the end where we now have:
he woke me up and we shared a room. he said, “you have to come to my bed,” and she said, “no. i don’t want to. it’s my body, my choice.”
do you believe she said that to him at that age?---yes. that is something that i’ve taught them to be able to do.
his honour: can i just, while mr haddock is looking at things, paragraph 7 in this same affidavit, just towards the end, a couple of lines up from the bottom:   s] also said, “it is clear to me that [mr chadwick] had groomed the case worker, and she completely fell for it.”
do you have any records of this conversation?---i have the record of the meeting with her, yes. which is what, your notes of the - - -?---it was – my mother was there, and she took the notes. could i suggest it would be a little odd that someone from cyps would use that sort of language about an employee of care and protection?---those are the words that she used, exactly.
... did you take any responsibility for that process?---yes, i do, because i was trying to do the right thing for the girls and i was following the process and it does involve a number of interviews with - - - - - - so - - -?--- - - - different services. yes. so you accept responsibility insofar as you said, “well, i did what i was meant to under the reporting guidelines”. is that right?---yes. i’ve done everything i can. and you don’t take any responsibility for the emotional impact that those continued interviews may have had on your children?---are you saying that, then, it would have been better to just ignore disclosures - - - his honour: no. no. no. the witness: - - - and not go - - - his honour: please. please try - - - the witness: - - - forward with - - - his honour: please try and just answer the question. it’s either yes or no answer - - -?---it’s an impossible question. ms treherne: well, on one occasion, ma’am, on 11 october, you say to the police, and on 11 october on my account where at one, two, three, four, five, six, seven – we’re at seven. well, no, let’s – yes. no, eight. let’s make it eight after the icl. eight interviews, you say:
why aren’t you interviewing [y] again?
do you remember saying that to the police?---yes. i do remember saying that. so at that stage, even though she had seen eight different people, you wanted her to be interviewed again, didn’t you?---the reason i asked that question is because her disclosures from the first day that she made them and was interviewed, had increased in frequency and detail. and i wondered if it would be important for her to be able to tell them about those. weren’t you concerned about her?---yes, absolutely. a little girl of four years old being dragged into a police station, saying, tell – tell the officer what your father did to you?---yes, of course. did that cross your mind? but notwithstanding that, you thought it was important that she have – she be interviewed again?---i asked if that – they – that would be part of their process. i, obviously, didn’t want to cause any extra stress for [y]. but my concern – the process does involve a lot of interviews, yes. and you read the appraisal material, didn’t you? you’ve read this report that’s in the icl’s tender bundle, the cyps appraisal under subpoena. have you read this before?---i – i’ve – so are you talking about the 200-odd pages that are part of their investigation, because i don’t think parents are provided with the actual report. that’s what they said to me. see, because one of the concerns that the police officer had and cyps had, you understand, is that – they were concerned that [y] had been coached?---i did read that in there. yes?---yes. and i was horrified and very upset by it. right, because what it says at page 41 of the icl’s tender bundle which is a sacat liaison phone call?---yes. and it says – the person, [au] says:
explain mum’s response.  ] says:
coaching?  ] says:
you guys feel any of that?
it is noted not specifically about coaching, but that she can’t elaborate on disclosures which is indicative of coaching, because if you have experienced something, can usually give more details on it. adults know they are lying so can play it, but with children – so that’s one of the biggest signs when they can’t elaborate. it doesn’t say specifically but alludes to the possibility because all the info is always coming from mum. [y] too, but always initiated by mum.
you see that there?---yes. and do you accept that that’s a possibility, that because you have continued to interview y, albeit informally, when she makes disclosures, that that has affected the outcome of this investigation?---i don’t know what to say to that - - -
well, you did it time and time again. you’ve done it for 12 months, ma’am, haven’t you?---yes, it does seem like that. yes.
you say that you firmly believe that he is a paedophile?---that – yes. and yet, you put orders before this court that this man spend time with your children. is that right?---yes. i’m in an impossible position because i’ve done what i needed to do – everything i can – to protect my children, and then with this outcome from cyps, i’m trying to acknowledge what they have recommended, which is that they couldn’t find one way or the other if the sexual abuse happened, and that they were recommending – i can’t remember their wording, but rebuilding relationships within the family unit. that’s – i am trying to – that’s my proposal, is to attempt to do that. his honour: but in circumstances where your beliefs have not changed, as ms treherne has said, about the father. correct?---yes, it’s very – like i said, an impossible position to be in, because that is their recommendation and i am trying - -
okay. in your notice of risk filed 13 october 2020, after a long list of risks you say your child and you were subjected to, you say this – let me just find it – sorry. i do beg your pardon, [ms chadwick]. i’m just trying to find it in my documents. thank you. i’m grateful to my friend. so there are some 31 particulars for family violence. the last one, 31, i’m just going to read it to you and if you want to see it, you just let me know?---thank you. continuing:   has taken on a mothering role for three-year-old [y] to shield her from some of the aggression in their father’s household and to comfort her. [x] sings to [y] to calm her down when they yell, gets her toothbrush ready, helps her with toileting and strokes her hair and settles her to sleep after nightmares.
right. and you would agree with me that you gave her attention after that disclosure?---yes. and you would agree with me that you – that she slept in your bed that night?---yes, i think so, yes. and she hadn’t been sleeping in your bed before then?---no. no. and she’s still sleeping in your bed, isn’t she?---yes, a lot of the time. and when she has a nightmare, she gets to sleep in your bed, correct?---not always. i have used the technique that her trauma counsellor has taught me, to help her refocus and feel safe. and if she’s feeling comfortable enough, she tries to go back to her own bed first. it just depends on the day and – and how – how she is. now, you accept from me that it’s possible, isn’t it, that she has made up a story on 27 august? you accept that’s a possibility? i know that’s not your belief, but it’s a possibility, isn’t it?---sure. yes. and it’s a possibility that in her little four-year-old mind, she says these words and mummy gives her cuddles. correct?---yes. “i get to sleep in mummy’s bed.” correct?---yes. i’m just asking you whether it’s a possibility, ma’am?---yes, it’s a possibility. but as time goes on, because she is pleased with the reaction from you – and i’m not suggesting she’s being dishonest, ma’am. but because this reaction, she considers, to be favourable, her stories get more outlandish. do you accept that that’s a possibility?---i accept it’s a possibility. but that is a really hard thing to even have suggested. i understand from your perspective but - - -?---i don’t think anyone in this courtroom can understand what the last 12 months has been like, actually, because we lived it. i’ve seen her suffering the entire time. and i’ve had to support her every night to try to get to sleep and to feel safe and to - - - now, you certainly don’t allege that any of these events occurred before you were separated from [mr chadwick], do you? i’m sorry. you have to say?---sorry. no.
evidence of the maternal grandfather (mr ad)
the report of ms k
1. background 1.1 [ms chadwick] and [mr chadwick] began living together in 2005, were married in 2009. their two daughters are [x], born [in] 2012, and [y], born [in] 2016. in august 2019 the couple were separated under the one roof. after discussion they arrived at an arrangement for sharing the care of the children, with no more than three days away from their mother. after the final separation [mr chadwick]’s father, [mr ab], was living with his son and would assist with care of the children, sometimes assisting with pick-ups or drop-offs. his partner, [ms r] (“[ms r]”) would cook for the family. the final separation took place in january 2020. a week-about arrangement for the children was in place for a while, but [ms chadwick] considered it unsettling for the children. she claimed that [mr chadwick] mistreated the children and that they were afraid of him. 1.2 consent orders were filed on 17/12/20 detailing the care arrangements for the holiday periods and school terms. [ms chadwick’s] contact with the children during school terms was to be on alternate weekends from friday at the end of the school day till tuesday at the beginning of school. in august 2021 [ms chadwick] retained the children. the children have had no contact with their father since then. 1.3 both parents in their documents have spoken about the violent actions of the other during their relationship. [ms chadwick] reported being sexually assaulted by [mr chadwick] in november 2019 during the time they were separated under the one roof, an allegation that [mr chadwick] has denied. [ms chadwick] obtained an interim family violence order against [mr chadwick], on the grounds of harassment and putting the children at risk. she apparently had support from dvcs. the parties agreed to, and the court ordered, “consent orders for the personal protection of the mother” on 22 february 2021. 1.4 late in august 2021 [ms chadwick] reported to the police that [y] had disclosed sexual assault by her father. the police sexual assault unit (sacat) and cyps conducted interviews. [ms chadwick] approached [at health unit] at the [t] hospital. since then [ms chadwick] has reported further disclosures. there have been reviews and appraisals conducted. [ms chadwick] has taken issue with the review processes which concluded that the alleged abuse was not substantiated 1.5 supervised contact between [mr chadwick] and the children pending a final hearing was recommended by the court, but the parties could not agree on a supervisor. when [mr chadwick] more recently proposed a professional contact supervision service, [ms chadwick] was unwilling to allow supervised contact before the completion of this family report. ... 1.7 at the end of my interview with [x], she said she would like me to ask her dad to give back some toys that he had at his place. because we had run over time, and it seemed to be more than a couple of items, i suggested she write me a list. i had no idea this would lead to the involvement of solicitors to get approval for new material to be supplied to me. [ms chadwick] rang me about the “letter” i had apparently requested [x] to send to me, saying she was not allowed to do that without the approval of both parties. when it was approved, it proved to be far more than the scribbled list from [x] that i expected. instead, the letter had an underlined heading “toys dad won’t give back”, then a brief message written by [x], requesting that i please ask [mr chadwick] to give back these “special things”, and informing me, “we don’t want to see him, we just want our stuff back”. there was a list for each child, including beautifully executed drawings of each of the items, a description of the item and a history of who gave it to them. this letter conveyed a lot more than the few scribbled items on a slip of paper that i imagined. perhaps not surprisingly, [mr chadwick] told me in a brief phone call that the finality implied by acceding to the request prevented him from doing it. ... 4. issues in dispute and issues arising during assessment 4.1 the issue of the children’s safety is in dispute. pertaining to that, [ms chadwick] is claiming that [mr chadwick] was violent towards her during their marriage, and was unduly punitive with the children. [mr chadwick] categorically denies this. furthermore [ms chadwick] alleges that during a violent episode after their separation, [mr chadwick] [sexually assaulted] her, which [mr chadwick] denies. [ms chadwick] detailed various instances suggesting that the children have been mistreated, put at risk and/or frightened by their father when in his care, all of which [mr chadwick] denied. on the basis of these instances, [ms chadwick] obtained a family violence order. 4.2 [ms chadwick] alleges that [y], their younger daughter, disclosed to her an episode of sexual assault by [mr chadwick]. further disclosures have been reported since the original investigations into this matter and [ms chadwick] alleges that their older daughter was being “groomed”. [mr chadwick] denies all of these allegations. his view has for some time been that [ms chadwick] was engaged in a campaign of parental alienation of the children from him. neither the police team nor cyps were able to substantiate any sexual assault on [y], and both agencies have closed the case. [ms chadwick] has taken issue with those processes. 4.3 [mr chadwick] reported that [ms chadwick] had made suggestions in the past that if he left her she could fabricate a case against him in order to take the children away from him. [ms chadwick] has claimed that [mr chadwick] threatened to take her to court to get the children on the basis of her mental health issues. 4.4 as reported by [ms chadwick], [y]’s later disclosures implicate [ms b], who allegedly was complicit in the abuse, as well as [mr ab] (the paternal grandfather) and his partner, [ms r], who apparently “did nothing” when [y] sought their assistance one night as she ran to tell them what her father was doing to her. [ms chadwick’s] report of this stated that [mr ab] dismissed what [y] said and told her to “go and play”, which seemed odd, given that the alleged incident happened at night, and [x] was asleep in bed at the time. 4.5 a further issue that emerges is that although the case of possible sexual abuse by [mr chadwick] has not been substantiated by the police or cyps, and both agencies alluded to the possibility of adult “coaching” of the children, the agencies have noted that the children are currently in the protective care of their mother. if the allegations proved to be false (deliberately or inadvertently), then the current care of the children might not be deemed protective. 5. adults ... 5.4 recalling the child-inclusive conference in october 2020, [ms chadwick] told me [x] said in the interview that she had “yukky butterflies in her tummy” at her father’s place. i noted later that these words did not appear in the memorandum to court. [ms chadwick] claimed that [mr chadwick] had “bullied and coached” [x] prior to the conference. [x] had “panic attacks” before visits to her father’s, according to [ms chadwick]. 5.5 when [ms chadwick] gave her account of [y]’s disclosure in late august 2021, she became quite distressed. she anxiously questioned how [y] would ever recover from the trauma of what had happened. i suggested that [y] simply needed to know that she did the right thing in telling her mother and that what happened to her was wrong and in no way her fault. in my view, if these circumstances applied for [y], given that there was no physical injury, and assuming no undue revisiting of what happened, she would readily recover and automatically let go of any emotional effects. 5.6 i understood from my conversation with [ms chadwick] that [y] had given the police officer from the sexual assault and child abuse team (sacat) a detailed account of what she had disclosed to her mother. [ms chadwick] was visibly distressed when she told me that [mr chadwick] would not be prosecuted, even though the police officer assured her that she believed her and believed [y]. during an interview with [dr v] at the [at health unit] in the [t hospital] some days later, [ms chadwick] learned that children will sometimes disclose more details of abuse as time goes by. i formed the opinion that [ms chadwick] was reassured by this prospect. 5.7 i was concerned by the level of anxiety and distress that [ms chadwick] was exhibiting. i asked about any violence that had occurred during the marriage. she said she recalled that the violence began around the time the children were born. “he’d always been domineering, isolated me from friends and family, drove a wedge between me and my dad”, she recounted. “he was financially controlling. i had no access to our money”. elaborating on this, [ms chadwick] claimed, “i had to discuss anything i wanted for the girls...he would arrive home from [store af] [...]”. as is common for women who have been victims of domestic violence, [ms chadwick] recalled how her husband would make her feel “crazy, and would “alter reality”. she referred to a violent incident during which he apparently sexually assaulted her when they were still under one roof. [ms chadwick] said she suspected her husband had other women, especially because he had “various stds during the relationship”. apparently he would grab her wrists, and make threats to “rearrange’’ her face. 5.8 in relation to the children, [ms chadwick] recalled that she “didn’t agree with his angry, forceful way of treating them”. for example, he would lock them in their rooms. she claimed the children had told her they would often just tell him what he wanted to hear. 5.9 in response to my question, [ms chadwick] replied that she did not tell [x] about [y]’s disclosures, however there had been further disclosures made in front of [x]. after this, [ms chadwick] noted, “ [x] disclosed that her father started what i’d call grooming”. reportedly, he would go into her room when she was getting dressed and block the door. if [x] asked for privacy, he would say, “i’m your father”. if [ms b] was there he would tell [x], “she has the same bits as you”. 5.10 on the subject of supervised contact, [ms chadwick] said she had offered it “a while ago” but “he refused”. now, she said emphatically, “i don’t think he should see them – even briefly. i think it would traumatise them”. ... 5.12 overall [ms chadwick] seemed understandably distressed by what had happened to [y] and anxious about the children’s welfare. there seemed to be a strong element of protectiveness, that i thought may have been exacerbated by [y]’s disclosures. it appeared that from the moment that [y] talked about the incident with the doll, [ms chadwick] was certain that [mr chadwick] had sexually abused their child. on reflection, i was surprised that she gave no indication that there had been a moment of disbelief, or a moment of wondering if there was an alternative explanation, given that she had lived with [mr chadwick] for 14 years, had written messages on cards expressing her appreciation of him as a husband and as a father, and had shared the care of the children with him for some months after their separation. ... 5.14 the four validity scales of the pai assess factors that could distort the results of testing. on the “inconsistency” scale, the “infrequency” scale and the “negative impression” scale, [ms chadwick’s] scores were in the average range, indicating that she responded consistently, attended appropriately to item content and “did not attempt to present a more negative impression of herself than the clinical picture would warrant” (morey, 1991 p12). however, on the “positive impression” (pim) scale, [ms chadwick’s] score was at a level suggesting that “the respondent attempted to portray herself as exceptionally free of the common shortcomings to which most individuals will admit” (morey, 1991, p13). according to morey, such a score can distort the accuracy of the clinical profile, by underrepresenting the extent and degree of significant test findings. in my experience, it is not uncommon to see an elevated pim score in the context of a family report, where there is a strong emotional investment in the outcome. however, [ms chadwick’s] score was over two standard deviations above the mean. at this level, according to morey, “the validity of the pai clinical scale is seriously questioned” and no clinical interpretation is recommended (morey, 1991, p13) 5.15 that having been said, all of [ms chadwick’s] clinical profile scale scores were in the average or below average range, which would normally indicate no psychopathology. although [ms chadwick’s] score on the “paranoia” scale was in the average range, of interest was her elevated score on one of the three “paranoia” subscales - (par-p, persecution) - which identifies “individuals who are quick to feel they are being treated inequitably, and easily believe there is a concerted effort by others to undermine their interests” (morey, 1991, p16). similarly, although [ms chadwick’s] score on the “anxiety-related disorders” scale (ard) was in the average range, on one of the ard subscales – (ard-t, traumatic stress) – which identifies individuals who typically had experienced a disturbing traumatic even in the past, her score was moderately elevated. such individuals “generally report that the event has left them changed, or damaged in some fundamental way (morey, 1991, p15). a number of pai items that reflect serious pathology have very low endorsement rates in normal samples. these have been termed “critical items.” [ms chadwick] endorsed three of these “critical items” related to traumatic stress. 5.16 treatment consideration scales. [ms chadwick’s] “treatment rejection” score reflects a person who “admits to few difficulties and has no desire to change the status quo” (morey, 1991, p20). [ms chadwick’s] very low score on the “aggression” scale (comprised of three subscales, namely agg-a, aggressive attitude, agg v, verbal aggression, and agg-p, physical aggression) might suggest “a very meek and unassertive person” (morey, 1991, p19 and p21). there was also a suggestion of a difficulty in the appropriate expression of anger. other treatment consideration scores were in the average range and not noteworthy. .... 5.18 [mr chadwick] arrived punctually and greeted me in a friendly manner. as we began the interview he spoke of how tired he was, and commented, “i want it over”. when telling me about the marriage, he noted, “mostly, we were seeing eye to eye”. i later noted that the child inclusive conference memorandum in november 2020 reported that [mr chadwick] made positive comments about [ms chadwick], and talked of being “very aligned” as parents. i heard that until 2019, he was doing shift work at [employer p] so that they could save more money for a better house. he recalled, “i gave lots of support to [ms chadwick] and her parents. i supported [ms chadwick] with her mental health and her relationship with her father.” apparently in 2015, [ms chadwick] went to a psychologist to assist her in her relationship with her father. acknowledging that he was “not a perfect husband”, [mr chadwick] declared, “i gave her all i had”. 5.21 in [mr chadwick]’s account, he recalled that he had “respect” for his wife, informing me that in 2019 he left [employer p], so there was no more shift work [...] i heard that in order for them to buy the bigger house, [ms chadwick] needed to work full-time, and [mr chadwick] was still doing shift work. according to him, once the shift work stopped, “that’s when things started to fall apart...i had been able to do a lot of drop-offs for the children, i liked cleaning the house - i got to choose the vacuum cleaner because i like vacuuming”. 5.22 [mr chadwick] recalled times when [ms chadwick] would become extremely angry. on one occasion having made some nasty remarks about him when they had friends over, she later threw a phone charger at him and hit him in the head. he spoke of [ms chadwick] “going off her brain when, it appeared, she interpreted his remarks about her being smart enough to be at [a senior level] at work as an attempt to force her to work full-time and progress to [a senior level]. she referred to him as “a weak c**t”. at such times, “i would just listen”, he said. 5.24 on moving day, when [ms chadwick] moved into the smaller house, according to [mr chadwick], “i let [ms chadwick] have almost everything. i kept the fridge, the big tv and my drier. [ms chadwick] went berserk and called us ‘a bunch of conniving c**ts’... [ms ad] was awful. we spoke later and she apologised.” the children’s clothes were divided as fairly as possible, [mr chadwick] said. at his solicitor’s suggestion, [mr chadwick] began to film interactions with [ms chadwick]. “then i got allegations that i was abusing her, controlling her – the money. she had access to all the accounts” he said, adding, “i’m now being accused of raping her in the family home. [at first] she said i was “rough” – now she’s calling it [sexual assault]”. 5.25 at one point in the interview, [mr chadwick] referred to [ms chadwick] having “lost her partner”. i did not pursue the relevance of this, but according to [mr chadwick], “everything went bad when [ms b] met the kids”. he listed: “allegations that [y] was grabbed by [ms b]”, “i got letters to my address, supposedly from someone i’d got pregnant”, “she said i took the children to covid hotspots and got her solicitor to write that i was putting them at risk”, “i’m accused of telling [x] that [ms chadwick] was going to die with covid”. 5.26 [mr chadwick] explained that their early attempts to share the children equally without doing a week-about arrangement were “entirely to do with when her [ms chadwick’s] parents were available. it was all about [mr ad]. [ms ag] was good, my dad was good. [ms ag] was dictated to by [mr ad]”. [mr chadwick] emphasised, “when we went to week-about, it worked”. [ms chadwick] then obtained a family violence order, on baseless claims in [mr chadwick]’s view, and having claimed she intended to share the care of the children equally, she then would only agree to his having four days per fortnight. 5.27 apparently the 5th of the 6 anonymous letters to his address came just after the family violence order was issued. [mr chadwick] said the dates of the 6 letters all “coincide with dates at court [etc]”. he had no doubt that the letters were written by [ms chadwick]. 5.28 [mr chadwick] emphasised that [y] had never made, to the police, cyps or a doctor ,a disclosure such as she allegedly made to [ms chadwick], “all of the reports to the police and cyps have been the written word of [ms chadwick] and verbal statements from [ms chadwick], he informed me. he also noted that [ms chadwick’s] parents have provided affidavits advising that [y] has made disclosures to them. [mr chadwick] said he learned that the [...] police had 3 other closed cases from when [ms chadwick] made false reports to them about him. each one was closed on the day it was opened, and [mr chadwick] had no knowledge of two of them, until [ms chadwick] included them in her submissions to the court. 5.29 [mr chadwick] denied all the allegations of violence, sexual assault and sexual abuse. having read the documents supplied, i thought he gave a credible account of his relationship with the children that was consistent with his comments during the interview. i formed the view that he loved being a parent and loved spending time with the children, particularly outdoors. he spoke proudly, and in detail, of their skills and achievements. notwithstanding his view that he and [ms chadwick] were generally like-minded on issues relating to the children, he emphasised one issue on which they were “chalk and cheese”, explaining, “ [ms chadwick] was risk-averse with the children. i like to prepare our children for life”. as an example, he said that [ms chadwick] did not want [x] walking to school”. given that he lived only 700 metres from the school in [suburb ah], [mr chadwick] wanted to encourage independence. “i took her and showed her the route. gradually we practised till she could be familiar with it. i’d watch her do it”. according to [mr chadwick], “ [ms chadwick] was horrified”, that he allowed [x] to go for bike rides. he would let her go ahead, insisting that she dismount at crossings. it struck me that [mr chadwick] was definitely not risk-averse or anxious, but believed in careful preparation to prevent any foreseeable harm. his description of his preparations for the trip with the family to [location aj], and his trip to [town ak] in 2021 (during the pandemic) showed a definite focus on careful forward planning. 5.30 in his interview [mr chadwick] made it clear that he did not want to “squeeze [ms chadwick] out”, he simply wanted to share the care of the children equally. “i don’t hit the bottle, don’t do drugs. i’m a resilient, well-grounded person. why did she give me 50-50 (shared care of the children)?” [mr chadwick] wondered whether [ms chadwick] had realised she would get more money if she had the children more of the time. he pointed out that all of the issues [ms chadwick] has raised in court documents about him putting the children at risk have been since the separation. he alluded at some point to the messages [ms chadwick] had written during the marriage about what a great husband and father he was. “i want my kids back”, he said. “it’s the most rewarding thing, helping kids be resilient.” ... 6. other adults 6.1 [ms b] impressed me as an intelligent, level-headed and credible person who did not seem to be given to hyperbole. she informed me she met [mr chadwick] in 2019, but he did not introduce her to the children until july 2020. at first, he introduced her as a friend, with other people, and they all went for a walk with [ms b]’s dog. 6.2 i heard from [ms b] that it had been just before their trip to [town ak] that she started staying over at [mr chadwick]’s house. in her account of events, she commented on the girls and her relationship with them. “when i first met them and the children were doing week about, they were so well-adjusted and happy, even though their parents were separated ... they had a good setup”. at another point [ms b] intimated, “i was always impressed with how polite and nice they were. [x] never showed any concerns about me. when the girls were there, i’d be at the house. i’d be back at my place other times”. there was one time, when they were on a walk together, that [x] “expressed being angry at her parents, especially her father, because he was the one who left”. 6.3 according to [ms b’s] account of events, it was during the sale of the house “when it all went awful”. she pointed out that this was “when [ms chadwick] became aware” [that she was in a committed relationship with [mr chadwick]]. in my reading of the documents i came across an example of how a misunderstanding can arise when a hearsay remark is interpreted through a particular emotional lens. [x] was talking with her dad about [ms b], whom she clearly liked. he had cause to reassure her that [ms b] was not going anywhere. when this conversation was reported to her mum, [ms chadwick] seemingly reworked the scene so that “[ms b] is not going anywhere” became a threat to [x]’s place in her dad’s affection, whether she liked it or not. 6.4 [ms b] said, “on our last weekend with the girls, [x] and [y] were both very clingy that weekend. i didn’t know why”. she observed that [y] was normally happy playing, and amusing herself, while [x] tended to want company all the time. “on that last weekend [y] kept waking up, unsettled... [coming into] our bed”, [ms b] recalled. “[x] kept wanting a hug from dad, all weekend, needing to be close”. speculating that the reason for the girls’ clinginess might have been that they’d had two weeks of lockdown, [ms b] informed me that the previous weekend, [ms chadwick] had tried to avoid handing over the children on the ground that handovers were ruled out by the government due to covid. [ms b] looked it up and found that children were permitted to move between houses. it had apparently taken phone calls to lawyers and between lawyers for [ms chadwick] finally to allow the children to come. 6.5 [ms b] reported [x] saying to her during that last weekend, “can i tell you a secret? don’t tell dad. poppy ([mr ab]) put pictures of naked girls on facebook”. apparently this had come from [ms chadwick]. [ms b] informed me that she and [mr chadwick] had tried hard to keep the children out of all the “parents’ stuff”. she intimated, “we’ve bought a new place so they can be at our house”. i heard about the various issues that [ms chadwick] had raised in support of her position that the children were being neglected or put at risk when in their father’s care, each one requiring [mr chadwick] to respond or seek evidence from relevant professionals to rebut the allegations. 6.6 [ms b] assured me that she had been in bed with [mr chadwick] when the alleged sexual abuse was said to have occurred. she also spoke of [ms chadwick’s] requests for reviews of the initial investigations. referring to the police interviews and the cyps interviews, she said, “as far as i know, [y] was very non-specific”, mainly reiterating the theme of “dad wasn’t nice”. ... 6.8 [mr ad] made clear his feelings about [mr chadwick] right from the start of the interview. he used the words “opinionated” and “disrespectful”, remarking, “we tolerated him”. it seemed [mr ad] had some strong views about the relationship of [mr chadwick] and his daughter. he informed me, “his ([mr chadwick]’s) mother died when he was young. he gets upset on her birthday – just takes off. no reference to [ms chadwick].” 6.9 i heard from [mr ad] that he got on well with [x], and used to get on with [y]. ”she avoids contact with any males, has been disinclined to give me a cuddle. i presumed [mr ad] was putting this down to what had allegedly happened to [y] at the hands of [mr chadwick]. [mr ad] went on to say, “just recently, she’s started to (give him a cuddle). i think she’s been wary of me. sometimes she used to sit on my knee”. [mr ad] told me that [x] is “very interesting – loves animals and insects”. 6.10 according to [mr ad], “[mr chadwick] was heartless- he would hide their asthma medication up in the top of the wardrobe”. also, [mr chadwick] apparently deleted an entire educational game in which [x] had progressed “up to 70” on her tablet, “because she dobbed on him for swearing”. [mr ad]’s perception of the marital separation was, “he walked out on her, chucked her out”. he implied that the abuse of [y] was “retribution for [ms chadwick]”, because [[mr chadwick]] doesn’t like to lose (referring to the property settlement). 6.11 [mr ad] gave an unflattering account of [mr chadwick’s] character. “he admires his own image. if there were people around, he’d ostentatiously play with the children... when we were there, he’d be vacuuming. we’d think, ‘what a good husband’. he would pretend to be vacuuming ... he can shed tears at the drop of a hat”. [mr ad] explained, “[ms chadwick’s] read the cyps report. she only cried once. [mr chadwick] got pages because he cried”. ... 6.13 [mr ad] revealed that [ms chadwick] had previously been in a relationship but had never introduced him as a partner. “he ([mr chadwick]) told the girls this guy would attack them in their beds at [ms chadwick’s]– his own deviousness”. although i did not doubt [mr ad]’s concerns were genuine, i was at times unsure about the reliability of the source of his information. 6.14 [ms ag] gave me a little of the background to [mr chadwick]’s relationship with her and her husband. “initially we welcomed him into the family. he had a good relationship with our son and our other daughter”. [ms ag] said she believed that [mr chadwick] had “anger issues”, perhaps due to traumatic events in his life. she recalled after he joined [employer p] he would be away every few months for up to 3 or 4 weeks. then he would say he needed to go to see his dad. “it was like a holiday without the wife and child”, ms ag recalled. she also recalled that there was lots of swearing. then, it appeared that he “stopped pretending”. according to [ms ag], ‘he seemed to opt out of caring for the kids – he’d be on shift work and he’d ask me to mind the kids”. 6.15 [ms ag] detailed a number of things that had concerned her over the years. she mentioned that when they were living separated under the one roof, [mr chadwick] “often didn’t come home”. then he “insisted on week-about with the children”. she reported, ”he’d been having all these other women over – confusing for the children”, then, “the children got in trouble for interrupting him and the new girlfriend in bed... sex”. again, i wondered about the reliability of the source of this information. 6.16 i learned from [ms ag] that “[ms chadwick] has been able to prove it was his ([mr chadwick]’s) icloud account that put the porn on the tablet”. she referred to his “grooming” of [x] and his “staring” at the children’s vaginas in the bath. she then recalled that when they were under one roof, “i’d be there and he’d put his arm around her – mixed messages”. 6.17 as with her husband, i was aware that [ms ag] was understandably very concerned for her daughter and grandchildren, and that she was convinced [mr chadwick] was guilty of the things he was accused of. however it was as if history was being re-written in the light of the sexual abuse disclosures. things that might have passed unremarked were now being seen through a different lens. any instances that might suggest [mr chadwick] exhibited aspects of a good husband or father would now be evidence of his ability to fake it convincingly. 6.18 [mr ab]: i spoke with [mr ab] by telephone. he seemed a genuine person, passionate, and with a habit of plain speaking. he declared that there was “no basis to any of the allegations”. he said that having been a [public servant] he could read people’s body language. “i’d barrel him!” he asserted, “just because he’s my son...”. i took him to mean there would be no fear or favour if he suspected his son was guilty. he pointed out that the children were only having two nights at a time with their father. 6.19 he also vouched for [ms b], assuring me that she was “nothing but a kind woman”. assuring me, “every door was open, all the time. my door was open”. the bathroom door was reportedly always open when the girls had baths. “if there was something going on, they wouldn’t be doing it there, where me and my partner were there to watch”, he pointed out. on the weekend in question, [ms b] apparently had some work to do and “needed some peace and quiet, because with [x], you can’t get 5 seconds away”, so [ms b] left, to go to her place, at about 2.30pm. [mr chadwick] senior recalled asking his son, “is she coming back”? because [ms r] was cooking and would need to know how many she was cooking for. his son confirmed that [ms b] would be back, and she did indeed return “in time for tea”. 6.20 [mr chadwick] assured me that [y] “would have said something if it had happened”, and [x] is “always like a shadow, so she’d have been there”. [mr chadwick] explained that the girls had been “brought up to know about telling someone if anyone touched them”. he recalled, “ [x] didn’t like having her other pop wanting to kiss her. he was always grumpy. she’d tell us. the girls had been taught the proper anatomical names for their body parts. [mr chadwick] said he had commented at one point that perhaps [y] was a bit young for the information she was receiving. his objection was apparently dismissed. [mr chadwick] recalled an incident when the parents were still together. [y] apparently had a fascination for genitalia. one day she approached him and exposed herself telling him, “i’ve got a vagina” and then pointing at him saying, “you’ve got a penis”. ... 6.22 recalling the times when the children started coming over for 4 days at a time, about may/june 21, he thought, [mr ab] related how he would collect them from school and “they acted like i was an axe-murderer”. at the school, “instead of just leaving [y] with me, [ms ag] would wait for [x] to come out and make a big fuss”....”we’d have them eating all together at the table, eating a large variety of food. just getting them to the table was a nightmare. [x] always had issue to talk about”... “we had them using cutlery, eventually”....”at [ms chadwick’s] it was clearly different, sitting at a little table and chairs and watching tv”. 6.23 [mr ab] pointed out that certain words used by the children, like “inappropriate” were “[ms chadwick’s] words”. [ms chadwick] was continually making claims about [mr chadwick]’s ( [mr chadwick]’s) “yelling”. [mr ab] emphasised, “i lived with them, it was not yelling or angry. if you speak sternly, they (the children) interpret it as yelling.” he went on to explain, “[mr chadwick] grew up with a father who was a [public servant]. i’d yell. these girls have been brainwashed since a baby... i raised my voice once at [y] and she said, “don’t yell at me”. 6.24 during a conversation with [ms ag] when he first met her, [mr ab] said he “got the impression that [ms chadwick] was a hypochondriac”. he apparently told her, “unless there’s blood drawn, i wouldn’t mollycoddle them (the children)”. he then could hardly believe the amount of medication in the children’s bags. “the nappy bag was full of stuff”, he said, adding, “mostly a drink of water and a cuddle will fix it”. from talking with [mr ab] it was not difficult to see that there were significant cultural differences between [ms and mr chadwick’s] families. 7. children 7.3 given her confidence and social skills, i formed the view that [y] would be capable of undertaking a bene-anthony family relations test. this is a simple projective test used to explore children’s emotional attitudes to key family members. in a play situation the child is asked to select figures to represent members of his or her family and an anonymous “mr nobody” is added to the selection. each figure is attached to a posting box. the child is then asked to direct a number of cards denoting pre-selected emotional attitudes or actions to whichever figure he or she wishes, or to “mr nobody”. the child is able to enjoy the non-directive exploration of feelings and to express his or her views without guilt. the test usefully indicates who is significant to the child and explores the degree of emotional involvement with each of the family members identified. 7.4 [y] selected figures to represent her mother, her father, her sister and herself. i explained the presence of “mr nobody” in the line-up. [y] managed to complete the task surprisingly quickly. i read out each item as i passed it to her to post in one of the boxes. she made decisive choices and had no hesitation about her choices. only a small number were allocated to mr nobody. although i was not observing closely, i was aware [y] seemed to be allocating a lot of the items representing positive feelings, both “outgoing” and “incoming” to her mother, and a good few of the items representing negative emotions to her father. i particularly noted she allocated herself two items, one suggesting this person was always fair and another suggesting this person complained too much. her sister received a few items. unfortunately while i was hurrying to record the items from each of the boxes before having to set the test up again for [x], i inadvertently recorded some in the wrong columns and did not realise at the time. therefore these results are my impressions, not necessarily accurate. 7.5 [y] did not mention being abused by her father and i did not ask. she referred to his shouting and being not nice. she showed more interest in the various objects and knick-knacks in my office. she asked if she could take one of the ornaments out to the waiting room when it was [x]’s turn to be interviewed. 7.6 [x] impressed me as a bright, thoughtful, articulate girl with admirable social graces. i met [x] on two occasions. on the first occasion she informed me i was the fourth person to whom she had spoken. i asked whether she knew why she was talking to me. from her mum, she had figured out, “we’re going to help the court decide where we live and where we feel safe. her mother had apparently advised her, “i’m not going to tell you what to say. you just have to be honest”. ... 7.8 when i enquired about the rules at their father’s place, [x] informed me, “if [y] screeches, he gets angry”. when she was talking about [ms b], she told me [ms b] was “nice mostly”, explaining, “she’d do my hair, but she’d swear”. [x] went on to tell me, “dad forced us to give [ms b] hugs or kiss her. [y] didn’t want to, but he made her. i didn’t want to get in trouble so i did”. having heard that her dad was “good at shouting”, i asked [x] to tell me about how things were when they used to spend regular time at their dad’s. “he’d kick us outside”, she replied. “[y] had an accident and poppy said i should have taken her to the toilet”. 7.9 i began to feel that[ x’s] mission was to convince me that her dad was the bad guy, and her mother the good guy. her next piece of evidence was: “once at mum’s i got scared, ‘cos i was going to be at dad’s when i needed to go to a sleepover. that weekend we didn’t go to dad’s because he wouldn’t take me – or buy the present”. i mentioned the early care arrangements when they used to do more swapping houses. [x] remarked, “i didn’t know where i was. mum made a little timetable. mum and my teacher went through it with me”. asked about the change to a week-about arrangement. [x] responded, “i used to feel nervous at dad’s. [y] didn’t want to go. he’d take us swimming. [y] couldn’t breathe – he’d dunk her under”. she concluded by saying, “i want a relationship with dad, but i don’t really want to see him.” she explained “i’ve tried to have fun with him. he’s always busy somehow – drinking wine, swearing, with [ms b] and queensland poppy and [ms r]. after a moment, she corrected herself, saying she did not want a relationship with him. 7.10 i conducted a bene anthony family relations test with [x]. she selected figures to represent her mother, her father, her sister and herself. she completed the task quite slowly, appearing careful about her responses. the end result was clear. among the items representing “outgoing” feelings, [x] allocated no positive items to her father, most of the positives to her mother, several positives to both her mother and her sister, a few positives to her sister alone. mr nobody was allocated one positive. her father was allocated all but three of the negative items, with two going to mr nobody and one to her sister. this kind of polarised result is of concern. 7.11 a similar picture was revealed in the items representing “incoming” feelings. this time just one negative item was allocated to her mother (this person in my family says i get in the way when i try to help). all but two positive items were allocated to her mother. the majority of the negative “incoming” items were allocated to her father. there were, however, seven negative “incoming” items that were allocated to mr nobody. these items were of interest. this person punishes me too often, this person in my family forgets my birthday, this person in my family often complains about me, this person in my family thinks that i have no sense, this person in my family won’t play with me when i’d like it. 7.12 on the second occasion with [x] i asked her what sorts of things she did with her dad. “she replied, “not much because dad would go off on holidays and mum would have to look after us, when we were babies”. a little later, she volunteered, “when i did something wrong he would lock me in my room”. she recalled, “once, i broke a remote control. he got angry and told me i shouldn’t have touched it.” without prompting, [x] informed me, “once i saw him emptying out our piggy banks – he stole from [y] and me”. that year mum got all the christmas presents and he put his name on them. he got us remote control cars because he liked them and [y] and i didn’t want them for christmas.” 7.13 [x] stopped abruptly, and then said, “also, it isn’t about this, we have written a letter about this. mummy’s lawyer will send it to you”. in answer to my question about being caught up in the adults’ business, [x] intimated, “she (unspecified in my notes) doesn’t understand it’s very hard - like piggy in the middle”. there was a conversation about parents accusing one another of lying, and [x] agreed it was hard to take. 7.14 referring to [ms b], [x] intimated, “she’s always inappropriate with dad...swearing ... they drink red wine... i saw them naked, both on the bed. we went to [town ak] – it was a hotspot and i don’t know why they took us there”. ... 7.17 in the midst of talking about the grandparents, [x] volunteered, “dad took all the tvs. he finally gave her (mum?) one, but not the remote”. in response to something i asked her, [x] listed things her dad should and should not do. he should be “more friendly, caring and understanding”. according to [x], he should ask “are you ok?” if they were hurt, he should not “yell” or “threaten to smack” them, “not drink as much wine” ([x] acknowledged, unprompted, “he’s not drunk’). she then intimated, “i think that he loves me, but it really doesn’t feel like it”. i asked [x] what her mum did if she was angry. she replied, “mum goes to her bedroom and calms down and comes back, says ‘sorry’.” 7.18 i had [x] do an oral sentence completion procedure. this is an instrument in which the child can respond to potentially sensitive items, amongst other neutral items, in an indirect manner. sometimes it can elicit more authentic reactions than direct questioning. some of [x]’s responses were: (i sometimes wish that ...) “my family wasn’t divorced”. (i get worried when...) “dad yells, or at handovers i’d get nervous, would be shaking”. (when i am with my father...) “i feel unsafe”. (i wish that my mother....) “understood me a little better”. (when i’m with my mother...) “i feel safe, loved & cared for – she spends time.” (the worst thing about parents being separated is...) “you’re in the middle and it’s hard because you love both of them, you just want to love both (i don’t want to love my dad though, ‘cos he’s been mean). (the person i can always rely on is...) “i think, mum”. (if i could have three wishes...) “that i’d have a normal life”, that i had a different dad who loved us and spends more time with us”. 7.19 [x] did not come up with a third wish, but continued, “last time, i said i wanted a relationship with him, but i changed my mind. i tried too many times, ‘dad can you please play with us?’ and got ‘no, i’m busy’.” she was clearly not finished yet. “he’d just stay home, swear, drink wine and talk with [ms r] and poppy and [ms b] – and he wore inappropriate t-shirts (“[slogan al]”). at some point during the sentence completion, [x] remarked, seemingly out of the blue, “every time mum taught me something, he’d say he did it” and a bit later, she added, “dad tells lies, tells us things mum’s done”. 8. conclusions 8.1 there are significant differences in the family cultures of [mr and ms chadwick]. unfortunately, their complementary parental qualities have not resulted in a comfortable balance but rather, two rigidly polarised positions. the result has been that the children are now deprived of the freedom to love both parents. 8.2 there have been a number of discrepancies in [ms chadwick’s] claims about [mr chadwick]’s exposure of the children to harm or risk. [mr chadwick] has managed to obtain medical test results that refute the idea of both children being lactose intolerant. [mr chadwick] was able to establish that his trip to [town ak] with the children had not broken any rules or ignored covid advice. 8.3 [ms chadwick] appears not to have a single good word about [mr chadwick] now, despite her many admiring words in the past. he is now seemingly defined by the alleged and unsubstantiated sexual abuse as a paedophile. [mr ad] and [ms ag] are seeing [mr chadwick] through the same lens. i could not rule out the possibility that the children were repeating things that were said unintentionally in their hearing, or deliberately. [mr chadwick]’s fears that the children were being deliberately alienated from their mother were not without validity. 8.4 it was of interest that the allegations against [mr chadwick] began once [ms b] was known to be his committed partner. [ms chadwick’s] pai results threw up the suggestion that she might be quite dependent and therefore anxious when it became clear that [mr chadwick] was in a committed relationship. 8.5 the possibility exists that the current arrangements pose a long-term threat to the children’s emotional and psychological development, with the level of anxiety that is being generated when [ms chadwick] fails to apply a calm rational approach to reduce the children’s fears. emotive statements about the children hiding fearfully in the wardrobe when [mr chadwick] was ringing and texting repeatedly were undoubtedly useful in securing her family violence order. changing the locks was a further extreme response. terms of reference 7i both children were visibly attached to their mother. [ms chadwick] offered them love, understanding, attention, creative activities, and a willingness to listen. 7ii the significant differences in family culture and parenting style of [ms and mr chadwick] would have provided complementary advantages for the children while the parents were able to appreciate each other’s strengths. they are now polarised, and in the current situation, the children are not free to love both parents. the children have been withheld from their father and have been allowed, or encouraged, to adopt a perspective that sees risk, deception and harm in every aspect of [mr chadwick]’s parenting approach and sees care, love and safety in [ms chadwick]’s. for children to grow up with the idea that 50% of their genetic inheritance is somehow defective is unfair, and likely to have lasting effects on their sense of self. protecting children from undue harm is what all parents wish to do. however [mr chadwick]’s idea of teaching the children resilience, so that they can cope with the inevitable “slings and arrows of outrageous fortune”, is also important. 7iii the children seem emotionally close to their mother and reliant on her. 7iv the current care arrangements, if they continue, are likely to inhibit the children’s emotional development. the idea that they were hiding in fear in the bedroom cupboard because [mr chadwick] was ringing and texting their mother repeatedly raises the question of her competence to adopt a calm and rational approach and reassure the children. 7v if the orders sought by the father in his amended report were implemented, assuming that the court found the alleged sexual abuse not to have occurred, in the short-term it would undoubtedly be very disturbing for the children, and for their mother. [mr chadwick] would possibly face a huge amount of resistance and resentment which would only add to the children’s current negative attitude. in the long-term, it could potentially be a satisfactory way to give the children the freedom to love both parents, providing that [mr chadwick] was able to maintain a genuine respect for [ms chadwick] as their mother and a forgiving approach to what has happened. the most effective person to give the children confidence in the value of a shared care arrangement would probably their mother, if she were capable of it. she would undoubtedly need to have ongoing professional help to reduce her fears and anxiety to the extent that she could genuinely reassure them that their father’s love for them was just as deep as hers, and that his parenting style was as valid as hers, and that he posed no threat to them by raising his voice. she would need to be able to tell the children she now realised she was wrong in her assessment of their dad, and encourage them to remember the good times with him. she would need to be encouraging of their relationship with [ms b] 7vii it is inevitable that the children would be distressed if they were separated from their mother.any change to the status quo will undoubtedly be distressing in the short term, but potentially not harmful in the longer term, provided the end result is that the children feel free to love both parents. a potential risk of keeping the children separated from their dad is that as they enter the teenage years, one or other (or both) of them may decide they want to switch their allegiance, and suddenly cut all ties with their mother, possibly over some relatively minor conflict situation. this extreme behaviour, born of rigid dichotomous thinking is another manifestation of anxiety 7viii both parents understand the day to day responsibilities of parenthood and both are willing and able to undertake them. the responsibility of a parent to show ongoing respect for the other parent is a vital factor in fostering emotional maturity in the children. [mr and ms chadwick] would do well to remind themselves what qualities drew them together in the first place. 7ix i believe that [mr chadwick] has the capacity to facilitate a meaningful relationship between the children and their mother. he has made it clear that it is what he wants. i believe that [ms chadwick] has the capacity, but seemingly not the will, at this point. 7x between the two parents, at their best, they are capable of providing for all the children’s needs, emotional, intellectual, psychological social, physical and practical. [mr chadwick]’s anxiety and risk aversion are likely to be passed on to the children, without the significant contribution of a role-model for building resilience. 7xii [mr chadwick]’s attitude towards [ms chadwick] has undoubtedly hardened since the allegations and [ms chadwick]’s efforts to keep the children from him. however i believe for the children’s sakes he would maintain a respectful attitude towards her. [ms chadwick], focussed as she is on [mr chadwick]’s guilt, would struggle to do this. an arrangement that restricts all contact between them except in emergencies might be necessary. as is well known, one of the best predictors of children’s well-being after the parental separation is absence of conflict between the parents, and in particular, the children’s freedom to openly love and talk about the other parent in both households. this requires a good deal of tolerance of difference. 7xiii [mr chadwick]’s amended application suggests that he would be willing and able to support her relationship with the children if [ms chadwick] sought significant psychological help. i think [ms chadwick] could manage it with some professional help, because she loves her children and wants what’s best for them. 7xv i think [ms chadwick] could benefit from professional help. 7xvi both children expressed a wish to remain with their mother and not see their father. however [x]’s responses in the sentence completion procedure indicate a wish to be free to love both parents, a wish to have a relationship with her dad (which she then retracted), and a wish (sometimes) that her parents would get back together – all suggesting that she would welcome time with her father if [ms chadwick] supported it. [y] would probably follow her sister’s lead. [ms chadwick]’s tendency to be black and white, her need to be certain, her intolerance for ambiguity and her heightened sense of what is right and what is wrong are all manifestations of anxiety. [x] has no doubt absorbed her mother’s way of thinking – a way of thinking that dictates there has to someone who is right and someone who is wrong. the alleged sexual abuse if the court found the abuse had occurred, the impact on the children would depend largely on how it was handled henceforth. they would need to know that they did the right thing by telling their mother, that the abuse was not their fault, and that what their dad did was wrong. if they also were free to recall good times with him, and to recognise good qualities in him, there need be no lasting ill-effects. it might not be appropriate for them to have any contact with him until they chose to themselves, if ever. the co-parenting relationship would probably not exist or be minimal and business-like. if contact were considered appropriate, measures such as supervised contact at first and limited day-time contact on special occasions might serve until the children are considered old enough to keep in touch independently when they choose to. xviii if the court found the sexual abuse had not occurred, the children would know they had been taken seriously, and the consequences of that. they might feel guilty and would need to know they weren’t going to be blamed, but that life would now get back to normal. the effect on the father has already been significant and would be reduced immediately. given [mr chadwick]’s focus on resilience, he would likely rise to the challenge of renewing the co-parenting relationship, at least at a minimal level, for the children’s sake. to minimise the risk of the mother raising false allegations again, she could be advised to seek professional help, particularly for her anxiety, and perhaps the professional should have access to this report and other court documents. there might also be a session or sessions with a psychologist to help the mother explain to the children her mistaken contribution to the demonising of the father. a clear plan for the reintroduction of the children to the mother (with a view to sharing their care equally) should be laid out. i have covered this already, i believe. the negative lens that the mother applies to aspects of the father’s parenting, arises from a need to be certain, black and white thinking and other aspects of anxiety. alleged family violence xix if the court found the violence had occurred as in the mother’s affidavits, the mother might well be affected by feelings of self-doubt and a loss of her sense of agency. family violence can have a damaging effect on children witnessing or living in such a household. if the mother is walking on eggshells, fearful to speak her mind, the children can pick up on this behaviour. or they can learn the entitled, superior attitude of the aggressor. family violence distorts relationships to the extent that the victim feels constantly having to justify herself or apologise, or be careful in what she says. a concern about the father, if the violence had occurred as alleged, is that his parenting might be governed by a sense of ownership of his children and that he has the final word on all decisions. if the court found that the violence raised by the father had occurred, the effects on him would be more easily healed due to his resilience and the fact of having a sense of agency, having left the marriage and started a new life. the mother’s parenting could potentially be compromised by a need for control, which is one manifestation of anxiety. as the children approach teenage years, all parents would be well-advised to be fostering their children’s independence and reining in their own need for control.
ms k’s oral evidence
mr haddock: [ms k], the mother presented to you with very fixed beliefs about the children having been abused. i’ve got that right, don’t i?---yes. and so it wouldn’t be a surprise to you that she has not stepped away from those fixed beliefs. she firmly believes the father is a paedophile. that wouldn’t surprise you?---no, it doesn’t surprise me. and so we’re now in a situation where, i suppose, the mother is saying to his honour, “well, you should find that there’s no unacceptable risk of the children being abused, but i still believe he’s a paedophile.” so if we accept for a moment that’s the situation we’re dealing with, sending the children to spend time with the father, that’s a real situation of cognitive dissonance for the mother, isn’t it?---well, it is. and so obviously that has a range of effects on her and her behaviours, correct?---yes. and it’s reasonable to assume that, in fact, if the children believe their father is unsafe, and they’re being told to go and spend time, that’s a situation of cognitive dissonance for the children as well, isn’t it?---yes. if – we’re assuming that the mum would be continuing to give them the message that it wasn’t safe. well, even if she’s not overtly giving them the message that it wasn’t safe, it would be obvious, wouldn’t it, that the mother would be struggling with her own beliefs that they’re not safe, and still saying, well, the children should go. she would have that personal struggle, correct?---yes. and the children, particularly these children, with their problems of separation from the mother, are likely to be highly attuned to their mother’s distress, correct?---i think so, definitely. yes, definitely. so we’ve almost got that situation of double blind communication, where the mother might be saying verbally, “yes, you should go,” but her behaviour is, without meaning to, communicating something very different, correct?---well, in other situations, i’ve known mothers who would go so far as to say, you have to go, because the court has ordered you to go. and in some cases – not as serious as this, probably – you know, that’s okay with the kids, because when they get to dad’s, it’s fine. i suppose that the risk and the problem, from the children’s perspective, is mum might be saying that, but, subconsciously, mum’s behaviours and level of distress is communicating something quite different, correct?---well, if she’s saying, you have to go, because the court said you have to go, i don’t – i don’t know how the kids – i would have to say you might be right. okay. well, let’s unpack this a little bit. let’s assume – let’s accept for as moment the mother’s evidence is unequivocally that the father is a paedophile. and so one of the problems that his honour faces is making a finding that the mother believes that, despite a range of inconsistencies and impossibilities put to her. that’s her fixed belief. now, let’s assume for a moment that his honour makes a finding that the mother has got that belief, and it’s immoveable. it doesn’t matter the inconsistency, doesn’t matter the improbability, she has got that belief. now, if he makes that finding, suggesting the children live with the mother and spend time with the father, it’s potentially a recipe for disaster for the children. do you agree with that?---yes, i think i do. we would expect to see things like scenes of children refusing to go the father, correct?---yes. and what we’ve got then is the mother simultaneously having to deal with scenes, but then that makes it very difficult for her to maintain her position that she should be encouraging the children to go, correct?---yes. that’s true. and that’s, of course, part of why you’ve got that concern you do about the current interim orders between the parties, correct? because what that is, it’s a focus – almost a lens of pressure on the children, but also on the mother, correct?---yes. i agree. and so all that can really do, that sort of arrangement, where the children live with the mother, is create further difficulties for the mother in terms of hypervigilance and hyper-anxiety. i’ve got that right, don’t i?---yes. and if we think about some of the dynamics that might affect that, if you accept from me that the evidence of the mother’s father was that the children’s father will be under intense scrutiny by me and by my daughter and by the children, that will be a dynamic that the children would be aware of, that their time with their father would be under scrutiny, not just by their mother, but also by their grandfather, correct?---yes. and so it seems perhaps unlikely that both the mother and the paternal grandfather – if i could put it this way, the people in the children’s community at the moment – it seems unlikely that they will be able to mask their feelings about the father from these two little girls, you accept that?---i would agree with that. and if we think about – sorry, i withdraw that. i will come back to that. and so that sort of scrutiny within that community for the children, that generates its own kind of harm for the children, doesn’t it?---yes – well, it does create difficulties for them and --- it can communicate to them that they’re unsafe in their relationship with their father, can’t it?---unless it makes them conclude that their mum is just wrong. and probably all of that idea of that scrutiny and that lens of focus probably makes it really impossible for the mother to maintain the aura of calm you talk about in your report that will be necessary for the children to live with her. i’ve got that right, don’t i?---yes. it’s hard to see that it could get to that calm place. and the mother’s anxiety about the children is probably always going to be heightened because of her own belief that she was personally sexually assaulted by the father. i’ve got that right?---say that again. sure. so the mother’s anxiety about the father is probably always going to be heightened because she has got her own belief that she was personally sexually assaulted by the father. that’s correct, isn’t it?---that’s correct, yes. and so we’ve got someone that believes they’ve been sexually assaulted by the father and believes unequivocally that he’s a paedophile. so even the most psychologically robust person with those sort of beliefs is going to really struggle with the idea of time between the children and the father. i’ve got that right, don’t i?---yes. yes. i – i do think that - - - and the mother is far from the most psychologically robust person, isn’t she?---yes. and – just pardon me one moment. and so just thinking about that, and the mother’s anxieties and psychological robustness or otherwise, we would expect, looking at this situation, that the children would be making further disclosures to the mother after time with the father, i’ve got that right?---would we? i’m asking you. his honour: sorry. could it be anything more than a possibility?---are we assuming that this is if the orders that they’ve signed were implemented? mr haddock: i understand your confusion. i will withdraw the question. i’m going to come back to it a little later in a different way?---okay. okay. so i will ask you something else. one of the things that these children have been experiencing is some trauma counselling. and isn’t one of the problems for children in this situation that the idea of trauma counselling – it assumes the fact that the trauma has occurred as reported by the patient, correct?---yes. so in effect, what the trauma counselling does – pardon me – is it reinforces the base statement reported by the patient, correct?---yes. and i – i don’t know whether the trauma counsellor was briefed by the mother. because - - -?---and has never actually heard the words from the children. i don’t know. no. because, of course, what we’ve potentially got there with that sort of counselling – and we can only say potentially, i accept that – is you’ve got a real reinforcement with the child of the allegation that has been made, correct?---yes. because what’s important, as part of the trauma counselling process, to reinforce that you believe the allegation, as the treating – as the provider of treatment, correct?---yes. because it’s only be reinforcing that that you can provide any therapy that helps the patient, correct?---yes. and so in this dynamic, that could have potentially been a very problematic thing for the children to experience, correct?---yes. and in fact, the very nature of that counselling could have caused the children to elaborate on their initial disclosures, correct?---well, they would have to get some input to elaborate. and that’s really what it comes back to, isn’t it? with these children, your suspicion is there has been some input, correct?---yes. and in fact, we can – i’ve used the word suspicion. i will come back to that word in another moment. but it seems far more likely than not that the mother or someone close to the mother has had some input with these children about the things they say about the father, correct?---i think so. and i also can – i can believe that there’s a possibility that it was inadvertent along the way, because people ask questions in ways that they don’t realise they’re supplying information. yes. and also maybe the reaction to a child, like, a reaction of comfort - - -?---yes. - has a serious impact on that dynamic as well?---yes. this dynamic, however, seems to have some elements of difference, because it would be difficult for you to understand the children saying things to you like, “the father didn’t care much for us when we were babies,” if that wasn’t some information they were specifically given by someone, correct?---that’s right. and that would pretty obviously be, to any adult, some negative information about the father to give the children, correct?---yes. so that seems to add an air of deliberateness to at least some of the information the children are apparently given, correct?---well, it – to be absolutely fair, it could be that there was a question from [x] about when we were babies, and this was a parent who believes in being truthful, you know, and – i go like that with – because i’ve heard a lot of parents who were only being truthful. and – and so it may have been that sort of thing, rather than, i’m going to say something mean about the father. yes. it’s funny how many parents hide behind the idea of, “i’m only being truthful,” to harm children, isn’t it?---mmm. they always seem to still tell them that santa claus exists, though. i don’t understand?---yes. now - - -?---i said that to one client. yes. now, of course, one of the problems we have when we – when we look at the situation, and the mother in this case is – we’ve got those invalid results about the psychopathology from the pai, correct?---yes. and so one of the things we have to seriously consider is the potential of the development in this situation of a folie à deux situation between the mother and the children, correct?---mmm. and in particular, if the mother’s beliefs about the father engaging in sexually abusing the children are very fixed, and those beliefs themselves are delusional, that would point directly towards the risk of a folie à deux developing for the children, correct?---i think so. and when - - - his honour: sorry, mr haddock. just for the purposes of the transcript writers, you might have to sort of spell out the – literally, the spelling and the understanding. mr haddock: of course. i will do the spelling, because my french has always been terrible. german, much better. so folie à deux is f-o-l-i-e à d-e-u-x. and i will do that now, your honour. so, [ms k], could you just explain to the court what a folie à deux situation is?---i’m not sure that i can explain it exactly, but it’s – it’s - - - well, maybe i will ask you some questions, and you can see whether you agree with me?---yes. it’s something that now, in the dsm-5, has been renamed shared delusion disorder, correct?---yes. and that’s what i think, yes. yes. it’s where one person - - -?---they reinforce each other. yes. where one person has a very fixed belief about a series of events having occurred, which seems unopen to be challenged. that’s part of the disorder, correct?---mmm. and the other part of the disorder is what they then do is they bring a person or persons – even a folie à trois – into that delusion, correct? you have to say yes for the transcript or no?---yes. yes. and so what you can actually have is people that are not delusional, children who are not delusional, taking on a delusional belief, correct?---that’s correct, yes. and that’s the nature of the disorder and how the disorder functions, correct?---yes. so one of the risks his honour would be deeming – so i take a step back. so his honour makes a finding that the views of the mother about the father being a paedophile are absolutely immoveable, (1), and if he makes a finding (2) that it doesn’t seem to matter what inconsistencies or impossibility is put to the mother, she always finds a but, and she firmly finds an explanation for why the children have been abused. if he makes those two findings, that would point squarely towards the risk of a folie à deux situation being in play here for these children, correct?---and the kids believing the delusion. yes. and so we actually have two elements of risk there. you have the usual risk to identity and long-term relationships and all the sorts of relationships that travel with children having a negative view of their father, but here we have these additional risks of a folie à deux developing, correct?---yes. and we’re certainly unable to discount that risk, because of the way the mother has answered the pai, correct?---how did you get to because of the way - - - i will step you through it. so one of the things we can’t do is we can’t discount the possibility of a folie à deux being in action?---that’s right. (a) because the pai results about psychopathology are invalid, correct?---yes. and in fact, when we look at them, even so, the elevated paranoia scale - - -?---yes. - - - would be a feature of a folie à deux, correct?---but it could also be an attempt –it just occurred to me that the – the trauma that was associated with the pai – it might have been that the mother was wanting to emphasise the trauma of what has –had happened to her daughter. so it’s - - - so in looking at that, that’s one possibility for the invalid results in the pai, correct?---yes. yes. but it doesn’t necessarily follow that we can discount the other possibility, correct?---no. that’s true. okay. so you’ve already covered with ms treherne that one of the major long-term risks to the children with their mother is the possibility, deliberately or otherwise, through the mother’s feedback, that they may have come to believe that they have been abused, correct?---yes. and they may have that belief irrespective of whether or not it has actually happened, correct?---yes. so the belief in that instance has the potential to be created by the mother and the mother’s reactions, correct?---yes. and that belief is fundamentally corrosive to the children, isn’t it?---yes. not just corrosive to them psychologically, but also corrosive to them developmentally, correct?---yes. and you would have a particular concern about the way the mother has approached the matter if his honour finds that the mother was informed by doctors at [at health unit] not to discuss disclosures with the children, and she repeatedly ignored that advice. that would cause you a greater concern about the mother, wouldn’t it?---yes. and it would seem to demonstrate a fixation almost by the mother on getting details about disclosures from the children, correct?---yes. and children in that situation, where a parent, and their primary parent, is asking them for details and asking them questions, they have that tendency to feel the need to double down to please the parent, correct?---i think so, yes. now, whether the parent is asking to be pleased or not, the children may perceive that, and so they add things, don’t they?---they - - - they can add things to stories that they’re telling a parent, correct?---well, they can, but i – i don’t know in this case whether it was the children’s additions or not. because in this case what we can’t discount is that there’s simply things that the mother has made up, correct?---well, that’s right. that’s right. but let’s assume – sorry. pardon me. just one moment. and so if his honour finds that the mother is repeatedly asking the children questions and trying to find out details of disclosures, after being advised by professionals not to do so, that in itself is a form of coaching of the children, isn’t it?---yes. and so irrespective of the overt saying of things to the children or the risk of – that it’s just made up by the mother, what we actually have is, if his honour makes that finding, the mother has plainly just engaged in a form of coaching anyway, correct?---yes. and that sort of coaching, that involves the children directly in the proceedings between the parents, doesn’t it?---yes. and in that sense, because it’s so corrosive, it’s actually engaging in a form of child abuse, isn’t it?---i think so. now, if his honour makes a finding that the situation for the children is so fraught with risk that they can’t remain with their mother, your assessment is that with some sensitive management, a change of residence for – to the father is something that can be managed for the children, i’ve got that right?---yes. i think it would be with great delicacy and difficulty, but yes. and part of that delicacy would need to be a real sensitivity to the mental health of the children, correct?---yes. and you would need to see a parent in the father who would be willing to do anything he could to ease that transition for the children in terms of getting them professional assistance and things like that, correct?---yes. just pardon me one moment. now, i spoke to you earlier about the girls’ community. let’s be blunt about it. [mr ad], their grandfather, he is a real problem in the dynamic in this family, isn’t he? his honour: sorry. maybe you would need to spell that out just a tad, mr haddock. mr haddock: i’m sorry, your honour. i will be a little bit more specific. the witness: yes. mr haddock: [mr ad], the children’s grandfather, his view of the father appears to be overwhelmingly negative, you accept that?---certainly. to the extent that he literally made the suggestion to you that his view was the father was sexually abusing the children because of an adverse property settlement outcome, correct?---as retribution, yes. i thought that was an outlandish - - - it’s completely extraordinary, isn’t it?---extraordinary statement. yes. yes. almost histrionic, correct?---yes. and the fact that he could even think that about the father would be really concerning for his honour where their grandfather says to the court, “i’ve got a close relationship with the children”, correct?---yes. no one – no one – no matter how hard they tried, would be able to hide such a strongly held opinion from the children, correct?---well, i think you said he claimed that he just never speaks to the children about their father. that sends its own message to the children, doesn’t it?---it does. yes. and it’s not a positive message, is it?---no. and you would be very concerned that he wouldn’t seem to have any awareness of that not being a positive message, wouldn’t you?---that’s what i would assume, really. and when we talk about the possibility of the children being coached, one of the possibilities is they’ve been exposed to inappropriate conversations between the mother and other people. just looking at that possibility for the moment, it’s still – whether it’s an inadvertent exposure or not – still deeply corrosive to the children to be exposed to those sort of conversations, isn’t it?---of course. it’s the opposite of being protective with children if they’re exposed to those sort of conversations?---absolutely. and when we look at these children, and we look at the potential risks to their – just for the moment, concentrate on the risk to their core identity. that’s what we’re talking about when we’re seeing them not having a relationship with their father, isn’t it?---yes. if he’s being cast as a monster. yes. so their core feelings of sense of self and self-esteem and self-respect all are buttressed by being able to have a relationship with their father, and they’re demolished by the concept that their father is a monster, i’ve got that right?---yes. and so that sense of identity has – being impaired in any way has a range of both long-term and short-term psychological consequences for the children, correct?---indeed. can you tell his honour what some of the long-term ones are?---well, i think the long-term ones have to do with their future relationships with men. growing up believing that your father was a paedophile and in that atmosphere of hypervigilance and so on, that has significant implications for their future relationships, i believe. and one of the other parts of particularly the risk for [x] at the moment appears to be her taking on this very black-and-white thinking of the mother. that was something you identified in your report, wasn’t it?---i don’t recall that. okay. that’s all right?---but – but yes. right. so one of the things that you spoke about in your report – and if you’ve got your report in front of you?---yes. your page 31, just at the top of the page, and it’s the sixth line down. it says:   has no doubt absorbed her mother’s way of thinking, a way of thinking that dictates that there has to someone who is right and someone who is wrong.
his honour: sorry. the paragraph number, please, mr haddock. mr haddock: yes, of course, your honour. 7(xvi)?---   has no doubt absorbed her mother’s way of thinking, a way of thinking that dictates there has to - - -
and you can see the sentence - - -?---i’ve left out the be. - - - the sentence previous to that. you talk about [ms chadwick]’s tendency to be black and white and need to be certain?---yes. her intolerance of ambiguity and heightened sense of what is right and wrong are all manifestations of anxiety?---yes. so let me take a step back and first ask you this question. is it concerning to you that one of the things that the mother denied is that she has anxiety, when she gave her evidence?---i’m astounded. it’s gobsmacking, isn’t it?---yes. that is the word that came to my mind, actually. it demonstrates a complete lack of insight on the part of the mother to give that evidence, doesn’t it?---yes. it was evident from the moment i saw her. and it probably sits very comfortably with your observations of [ms chadwick] in her testing as being someone that’s unlikely to seek treatment and seek assistance for psychological issues, correct?---yes. yes?---yes. so just coming back here, one of the risks to [x] is continuing to absorb and maintain this sort of black-and-white thinking and the intolerance and everything that goes with it, correct?---yes. well, i say that because it’s pretty much well-known that anxiety is not inherited, but it’s learned from the people closest around you. and that’s why we have exposure therapy, because that’s a way of attempting to unlearn a learned behaviour, which is the anxiety, correct?---yes. yes. and so when we think about this, one of the observations you made of [x] – or the impression, rather, i think, is a more fair way of putting it – is that she seemed to be on a mission, 7.9, to convince you that her father was the bad guy, if i could use words like that. that was very much your impression, correct?---it certainly was. i was quite surprised at the level of intensity of it. and so when i looked at your report, it seemed to me – tell me if this impression is accurate – that when we looked at the intensity of that mission of [x]’s alongside the using of words like “unsafe”, which are not, as we’ve heard earlier, ordinary words, those things pointed directly towards your concern about the mother being actively involved in coaching the children?---yes. correct? that seemed to be two things that indicated more of an active involvement in coaching than in what might be called a passive involvement, correct?---or i suppose, again, if i was being fair, it might be just that her own anxiety is so ever-present that the kids couldn’t help but take it on. and so just feeding into that, it perhaps to extent doesn’t matter because the outcome there would be the same in terms of her being either deliberately or inadvertently exposed to inappropriate adult conversations to use words like “unsafe”, correct?---yes. yes?---true. and certainly when we add to that the process of the letter and the letter writing and the saga that that was, it was more evidence that was indicative to you of some active coaching of the children, correct?---yes. yes. i’m willing to accept that perhaps the mum did think that i wanted a letter, and perhaps she just wanted the children to present a lovely letter, but - - - but the whole process was really an extraordinary experience for you - - -?---yes. - in the work that you’ve done over the years, wasn’t it?---it is – sorry? certainly an extraordinary process for you when you - - -?---yes. - think about the cases you’ve had over the years?---yes. that was an extraordinary thing, wasn’t it?---it was. yes. and just thinking for a moment about the very, very explicit nature of some of the alleged disclosures by [y], noting – i want to be clear – the explicit nature appears to only occur when there’s no third party present who’s a professional, but just thinking about those, we can’t exclude the possibility that they’re fabricated or the result of a deliberate suggestion to [y], correct?---i say correct. yes. so if his honour finds that the allegations of abuse made against the father are false either deliberately or inadvertently and we think about the mother’s fixed belief, we’re really entering the territory where if we focus on the children, his honour has got no other option than to change the residence of the children if they’re to have a meaningful relationship with their father, correct?---well, i think that’s kind of where i’m coming to. those are the questions, your honour. thank you.
tenders
written submissions on behalf of the applicant
the evidence of the mother the affidavit evidence the mother filed two trial affidavits in the proceedings. the first of those was filed for an iteration of the trial that was not reached (in april 2022), the second was filed to update the court in relation to several further alleged disclosures. the timing of the evidence is important. the father, on 12 april 2022, filed a case outline for the original trial in accordance with the filing directions. the mother did not comply with those directions. the result was that the mother had access to significant elements of the father’s case in advance of filing her second affidavit, and most particularly criticisms as to the nature of the affidavit material and matters not contained therein. despite this, the mother’s second affidavit took no steps to change her approach nor to cure serious evidentiary omissions by her. the affidavit evidence of the mother was unclear, imprecise, and repetitive. events alleged by the mother were repeated many times, often without detail. unfortunately, similar approaches are seen in the mother’s second affidavit. the mother’s decision to lead evidence in this chaotic manner, whilst represented by experienced family lawyers, points towards a deliberate attempt by the mother to provide the father with a near impenetrable wall of allegations, difficult to properly address in any hearing. the choice to pursue such an approach would suggest to the court that the mother’s criticism of the father is unbridled and her approach towards parenting generally, and the allegations specifically, is similarly unbridled and chaotic. the general tenor of the mother’s evidence in her affidavit suited that she displayed in the witness box. namely, she was overblown and dramatic concerning her descriptions of events, often quite out of proportion to what had occurred. this included suggesting that not giving a child fruit for lunch was neglect and somehow ‘if [the court] had seen [y] that day, [the court] would understand’. the mother’s position concerning sexual abuse of the children the mother gave evidence and presented as a person with a fixed position that the children had been sexually abused by their father. her position was unshakeable. her belief was open to no form of challenge. consistent with the mother’s approach, at all stages, was that even when confronted with not only the lack of likelyhood but the physical impossibility of certain complaints of the children, she sought to find some excuse to say that the children had been sexually abused. her approach was extraordinary. the mother believes that not only is the father giving false evidence that he has sexually abused the children, she extends that belief to others who give evidence that certain allegations simply cannot be true. on the mother’s case the father has inveigled his partner, his father and his father’s partner to lie for him and to actively conceal his abuse of [y]. that includes believing that at one point whilst [ms b] was in the room the father yelling at [y] that she ‘had to hold his penis or she will not sleep in his bed again’ and forcing the child to masturbate him whilst there were other persons in the house, making the father perhaps allegedly one of the world’s most careless paedophiles. that difficulty did not faze the mother when it came to pressing her allegation, indeed she resorted to a fig leaf she often employed saying words to the effect of “that’s what [y] said and i believe her”. notably, the mother never went into particular detail about why she believed [y], even when confronted with the reality of if what she had been told by [y] was true on various occasions [y] had lied to professional persons trained at interviewing her. this represented one of the most remarkable features of the evidence of the mother which was her ability to ‘self-edit’ out inconsistencies in allegations to attempt to arrive at an explanation that the father had abused the children. indeed, on questioning, the mother admitted that she was determined to come up with a reason why a disclosure would make sense. specific examples of this are:- the mother’s admission under cross-examination that she had removed from her affidavit any mention of comments made by [y] that did not make sense concerning allegations, the mother’s concession that she had not put in her affidavit: - that when interviewed by the police [y] had made quite a different assertion to the police about where she had been poked with the doll, being in her piriformis muscle and not inside her vagina or labia as allegedly disclosed to the mother, that [y] told the police that she had not touched the father’s penis, something completely contrary to what she had allegedly asserted to the mother, that [y] told police that when the incident supposedly occurred she was wearing swimmers that covered her back and front but that did not cover her vagina, that [y] told the police her father had called the police after the alleged incident in the shower where he was supposed to have abused her, that [y] told the police she had not told anyone what happened in the shower, which the mother would have known was a lie if the mother’s evidence was true, that [y] did not disclose a penetrative act to the police, that when [y] spoke about pinching she indicated only pinching to her arm, not her vagina, before telling the police that she had never been pinched, before telling the police dad pinched her, that [y] said that her father has never made her upset, that [y] said to the police nothing about the father’s penis being in her face, does not speak about him pulling her vagina, that when [y] spoke of poking she did not show penetration when demonstrating the incident, that [y] told the police that when she sleeps at her dad’s house she sleeps in her own room and not with the father, and that upon being told by the police that [y] had not disclosed abuse instead of being comforted she expressed dissatisfaction and histrionically declared “he keeps getting away with it”, where any reasonable parent might have taken some assurance from such a representation from a professional. beyond those matters there were numerous inconsistencies put to the mother that demonstrated that relevant allegations could not have occurred. in all instances, the mother simply refused to believe any alternative explanation. specific examples from her evidence were:- the inability to understand the physical impossibility of the child being penetrated by the doll in the way alleged, the lack of any physical harm to [y] observed by any medical professional at any stage despite allegations that would have caused significant physical injury, whilst accepting it is unlikely that if the father was a paedophile he would be content for the children to attend on psychological professionals being unable to articulate or view that as inconsistent, an inability to accept that despite multiple and repeated interviews by professionals, including medical professionals, the children had not been sexually abused by their father. this extended to trying to find excuses when confronted from things people allegedly said that happened to not be in evidence, despite it being pointed out to her that she asked numerous leading questions of [y], and that [y] was unlikely to say no to her, the mother believed what [y] had allegedly disclosed was truthful, despite the physical impossibilities of a number of ‘gestures’ that [y] allegedly made that indicated abuse, the mother maintained they had occurred or tried to modify her evidence from her affidavit to attempt to make them plausible, and an inability to accept that when [y] commented about a dream that her father was chasing her with [animals] that was a dream yet anything else concerning the father was a recovered memory of abuse. the above inconsistencies were centrally important to understanding the allegations, or as the mother insisted at the outset of proceedings that ‘they are not allegations they are disclosures’. the mother deliberately concealed exculpatory details and inconsistencies from the court and continued to do so even after her failure to include these significant details was pointed out in the father’s first case outline. certainly, despite declaiming that she had been careful to give a full picture of the circumstances to the court, her later cross-examination suggested that she had plainly not done so. beyond those matters, the mother’s actions also sat uncomfortably with a genuine belief that [y] had been sexually abused by the father. most notable was the evidence concerning the alleged instrument of violent abuse, the ‘tiny doll’. the mother’s evidence was that despite the doll being an alleged instrument of abuse she continued to allow [y] to play with the doll and it remained [y]’s favourite for some time. the mother’s evidence demonstrated a lack of reality or understanding of appropriate parenting. the mother’s conduct concerning disclosures the mother’s conduct concerning disclosures allegedly made to her was a significant part of her evidence. repeated examples were given by the mother in her evidence where she asked questions of the children when an alleged disclosure was made. the mother concealed in her affidavit that she had been explicitly told by the at health unit ([at health unit]) not to engage in such behaviours. it was only upon questioning in cross-examination that she conceded she had been told that by [at health unit] yet had persisted with her questioning. what emerged was a pattern where, on nearly every occasion, [y] would make an alleged disclosure and would receive comfort from her mother. [y] would be told she was brave. [y] would be given attention. [y] was told she was believed. those matters simply and clearly reinforced to [y] that saying negative things about her father, especially things concerning penises’, elicited that response from her mother. in one sense it is little wonder that the allegations have grown more and more outlandish from [y] over time, a matter the mother appears blind to. of additional concern was the mother’s unwavering approach to permitting and exposing [x] to alleged disclosures by [y]. the mother’s affidavit evidence provided several examples of [x] being exposed to the mother having [y] repeat disclosures and questioning [y] for further details. that approach exposed [x] to concerning disclosures and it put [x] squarely in the midst of conflict between her parents. the approach lacked any child focus and points towards a conclusion that the mother’s parenting capacity is severely iimpaired. that concern is significant particularly because of the mother’s self-serving declaration in her evidence in chief that she had “done nothing wrong”, something that was problematic. the mother’s view of the father & the children’s environment with her the mother’s evidence revealed a determinedly negative view of the father. that view was unable to be shifted. she suggested she had been financially controlled by the father when on testing her evidence she had her own financial resources, had paid bills without the approval of the father from joint funds and had been offered control of the parties' finances by the father. she did nothing to challenge her children apparently expressing that they wanted their father dead on several occasions and in fact communicated her approval of the sentiment. she alleged she had been subject to threats and demands by the father when an examination of the records of text messages revealed there to be no threat and no demand, she simply lied about those matters in her affidavit. she alleged to the police that the father was “boasting” about being interviewed by the police in family law documents- a position that was fanciful. the attitude of the mother was not concealed from the children, far from it. the mother only in cross-examination admitted to criticising the father to the children and indeed appeared to have said so many negative things to the children about their father that she could not recall what they were. unfortunately, that attitude is not confined to the mother. the maternal grandparents who say they have a close relationship with the children have a totally negative view of the father as was clear from their evidence and engagement at the family report. allegations of family violence the mother made significant allegations of family violence against the father. those allegations were not properly made out by her. the difficulties with her allegations of financial control are set out above. her apparent belief that a person engaged in family violence by going on a holiday without her agreement beggared belief. her serious allegation that she was sexually assaulted by the father was plainly impossible given the way in which she recounted it. there is no way in which the mother could have been assaulted in the manner that she was without there being obvious physical damage and her becoming unconscious. the timing of the allegation occurring late in proceedings and its lack of disclosure to any psychologist until very late in proceedings point towards a conclusion that the allegation was manufactured by the mother, alongside other allegations she casts at the father. the graphic nature of the disclosures the nature of the disclosures by the children and particularly [y] are graphic. that points towards the children either being exposed to inappropriate conversations, the allegations are coached, they are fabricated, or a combination of the above. the terms used by the children are not children’s terms as identified by the expert, especially where [y] was 4 at the time of the alleged disclosures. the changing evidence of the mother concerning what was said and in particular what was gestured by [y] points towards fabrication. there are no specific pieces of evidence that demonstrate the children were exposed to inappropriate conversations of a sexual nature. that leaves the court with the possibility that the nature of the disclosures and their repetition comes from the reassurance and attention the children receive from making disclosures. the difficulty with that position is that it does not account for the graphic nature of the disclosures. almost by a process of elimination one arrives at a conclusion of fabrication as the evidence and certainly the presentation of the mother, particularly at the sacat interview when she realised the father would not be charged, points towards that conclusion. the evidence of the court child expert the evidence of [ms k] provided significant illumination. key amongst her evidence are the following matters: - that an arrangement that had the children spending time with the father whilst living with the mother would cause the mother and the children to experience a problematic state of cognitive dissonance, that the current interim arrangement for time between the parties was in effect a ‘recipe for disaster’ and that under the current situation we would expect to see refusals and scenes by the children- which it transpires is precisely what has occurred, that it was difficult to see how the mother could get to a calm place concerning the children spending time with the father, that part of the explanation for continued and elaborated disclosures could be the attendance at trauma counselling, that her view is that it is most likely that there has been coaching of the children against the father and we cannot exclude the possibility that the disclosures have been fabricated by the mother, that the mother had engaged in a form of child abuse of the children, that the mother presents as a risk to the children in terms of the development of a folie a deux, that the children are at risk of damage to their core identity in the care of the mother, that the mother has no insight into her own anxieties, there impact on the children and that poses significant risks to the children, that it was not worse for the children to be removed from the mother than it was to remain living with her, her sense was that the father and his partner were attuned sensitive people and would manage the transition to their household, and that if the focus was on the children the only option for the court was to place them living with the father. the court child expert’s evidence succinctly and fairly set out the risks for these children. she sensitively expressed a view as to their balance and concluded that the children should move to live with the father. the evidence of the father the father’s evidence was open, honest, and demonstrated a significant degree of insight. unlike the mother the father was able to concede to a degree of fault, whereas the mother could not readily admit to any parenting weakness. the father acknowledged sensitively the difficulties with his position and for the children in transitioning to live with him. he explained the flexible recourse he would have to experts to deal with the difficulty. he expressed a genuine, caring, and sensitive expression of forgiveness to the mother for her allegations. in every respect, his evidence painted the picture of a man the complete opposite of the demonic character painted by the mother in her material and in her oral evidence. parental responsibility sole parental responsibility should fall to the father. on his application the children will be living with him and the parents have a total inability to communicate. that would allow the court to rebut the presumption. meaningful relationship on the father’s case the children have been deprived of the benefit of a meaningful relationship with him. the benefit to them of that meaningful relationship is conceded by all parties and was outlined in the evidence of [ms k]. the father says that given the mother’s attitude and recent approach when she has claimed to have reformed where even in front of supervisors she stood mute and said not one word of encouragement to the children to see the father means that there cannot be any meaningful relationship experienced by the children in the care of the mother. the only way the children can enjoy the benefit of that meaningful relationship is by a change of residence. risks the balance of risk in this matter points squarely towards the proposal of the father. it is notable that there is no contention of unacceptable risk put by the mother, in fact, it is expressly denied. this would appear to mean that even on an assessment lower than the balance of probabilities the mother does not say to the court that the father is a risk. that in and of itself points directly to the father’s case concerning the mother’s irrational belief that he has sexually abused the children, in that she believes it still despite considering the likelihood of it occurring, at least legally, to be less than a probability. beyond that, the risks in the matter are raised squarely against the mother. the risk to the children of taking on a belief they have been sexually abused, of not having a relationship with their father, of being exposed to the cognitive dissonance of their mother telling them their father is an abuser yet encouraging them to go are all matters that can only be addressed through making orders in accordance with the application of the father. the mother’s attitude towards the father and her willingness to engage in what [ms k] acknowledged was child abuse of the children by involving them in the dispute can only be guarded against on the application of the father. the exposure of the children to the mother’s anxieties and the corrosive effect of same can only be guarded against on the application of the father. the mother’s application completely fails to deal with these risks and is in effect the exact recipe for disaster presciently observed by [ms k]. the mother’s proposal is one setting everyone up for failure and trauma. likely effect on the children the likely effect on the children of a change of residence is significant. however, so is the enaction mother’s proposal. in balancing those impacts and how they can be managed the court would prefer the approach of the father given his insight and sensitivity and the support for it in the evidence of [ms k]. attitude to the responsibilities of parenthood the mother’s attitude to the responsibilities of parenthood is deeply deficient. her histrionic nature and willingness to engage in child abuse with no insight at all is demonstrative of a deep seated problem. the difficult is that it is plain the mother sees no problem at all in her parenting and is not motivated to seek any form of psychological assistance to aid her in dealing with these difficulties and her abusive behaviours- not just because she cannot acknowledge that they are abusive. the father’s attitude by contrast to the mother’s was measured, sensitive and child-focussed despite all the arrows shot at him by the mother. conclusion the father says that the court would make orders in accordance with the best interests of the children and those interests are reflected in the orders that he seeks.
written submissions on behalf of the respondent
in these submissions: “amfo” is amended minute of final orders filed on behalf of the mother on 30/08/2022 “jtb” is the joint tender bundle “meb” is mother’s exhibit book filed 30/03/2022 “mgm’s affidavit” is affidavit of [ms ag] filed 29 march 2022 “t” is transcript “f” is following the orders sought by the mother provide for [y] (6) and [x] (10) to recommence time and rebuild their relationships with their father. the orders sought by the father represent a drastic, untested, and unnecessary change to the care arrangements which the children have previously known. these two young girls would be taken from their home and the primary care of their mother, would live with the father (who they have only just recommenced spending time with), and would spend no time with their mother for 6 months, followed by supervised time, then alternate weekend time. to his credit, even the father expressed doubts about these arrangements- “i genuinely don’t think in the best interests of the girls is ripping them away and giving them to one party for a big period of time. i genuinely don’t think that, and its’- that order is not in there for any other purpose of the advice and for...” (t., p. 103, line 42 & f). [ms k], described a change of residence as “a last resort measure” (t., p. 314, l. 19, p. 335, l. 14). the court would not subject the children to the father’s orders when the mother has acted in ways which she genuinely believed were necessary to protect the children, has not sought a finding of unacceptable risk to the children, has agreed to interim orders recommencing time with the father, and is seeking the restoration of the children’s relationships him. the court could not be confident about the father’s capacity to meet the unparalleled challenges of the parenting arrangements he proposes. the orders sought by the mother at the commencement of the final hearing are set out in amfo. they have been superseded to some extent by the interim orders made by consent on 2 september 2022 (“the interim orders”). the interim orders have already commenced the process envisaged in the amfo by providing for the girls to recommence time with their father. it is likely that, by the time judgment is handed down in this matter, the period of supervision provided for in the interim orders will have been completed, and the children will be spending weekly or alternate weekend time with their father as provided for in order 3. the mother gave evidence that she saw the supervision “as a way of supporting the children” back to spending time with their father (t., p. 267 l. 41 & f and p.268, l.5 & f). [ms k] agreed that the fact that the mother had agreed to those interim orders “shows goodwill on the part of the mother to facilitate a relationship between the father and the children” (t., p. 336, l. 37). [ms k] gave evidence that what is important is that the father is “quickly reinstated as a significant parent” (t., p. 306, l. 32 & f). when asked by counsel for the icl whether that meant “along the lines of what the father is proposing” she said “i’m really unsure about- about that” (t., p. 306, l. 37). the mother seeks that the final “spend time” orders be as set out in her proposed order 10 (afmo), save that, consistently with the interim orders, the final stage would involve the children spending time with the father from friday after school to monday before school each alternate weekend (current interim order 3(d)). this kind of arrangement is what she consistently sought in these proceedings before [y] made what the mother believed to be disclosures of sexual abuse. the court is of course not bound by the proposals of the parties, and is aware (t., p. 15, i.30) that the mother was prepared to agree, prior to the commencement of the hearing of the matter, to a more substantial time arrangement for the children with their father. the mother accepts that the court may find that it is consistent with the children’s best interests for time with their father to be more substantial than her proposed final stage- and leaves that in the hands of the court. she also accepts that, if such an order is made, the court may take the view that an order for equal shared parental responsibility is in the children’s best interests- notwithstanding that is not the order that she seeks (the mother was seeking sole parental responsibility by the time of the cic dated 30 october 2020 and well prior to august 2021). it may be that the court takes the view that an order for espr will assist with the repair work that needs to be done in the family. orders 4, 6, 7-9 and 25 in the amfo have been superseded by the interim orders- and are no longer sought by the mother. under cross examination by counsel for the icl she indicated that she thought that it would be a “really good idea” for the parents to participate in a family therapy process (t., p.268, l.33 & f)- and the court would make orders for that to occur in any terms sought by the icl. the mother’s position that the children should recommence spending time with the father followed the cyps appraisal outcome advice received by the parties on monday 29 august 2022- just two days before the commencement of the final hearing (this document is at jtb, p. 142). following the receipt of that appraisal outcome advice, and consistently with the recommendation that the parties focus on the “recovery of relationships within the family unit to provide stability and a sense of identity for the children”, the mother gave instructions for the filing of the amfo. prior to that, she had been waiting for the outcome, having been told by a senior officer of cyps on 18 march 2022 that “a number of deficiencies and errors” had been found in the previous process which had found no abuse or neglect of [y] and [x] and that “[b]ased on the statements made by the children to police and other family members it is not valid to make such a definitive statement. on the balance of probability an experience has led to the children making such disclosures” (meb, p. 30). in late august and early september 2021, the mother was faced with what seemed to be disclosures of sexual abuse by her father made by [y]. those apparent disclosures were made not just to her, but also to her mother (mgm’s affidavit, paras 34-50) and to [y]’s doctor, [dr u] ([dr u]’s notes from 1 september 2021 at jtb, p. 297 record that “the disclosure today is very convincing and [y] is able to describe quite well what has happened to her”). to the sacat team [y] also said some things about her father’s behaviour which were consistent with aspects of what she had told the mother (the sacat interview is at p 71 and following of jtb). the mother became aware of the details of that sacat interview when the material was produced under subpoena in these proceedings. the mother genuinely believed [y] had been sexually abused by the father- and acted in the ways that she believed were necessary to protect [y] and [x] - including stopping their time with the father. a magistrate was sufficiently persuaded by the evidence to make an order suspending the children’s time with their father. a context for the mother’s genuine belief was that she had (and had already raised) concerns about the way the father had behaved and was behaving towards her and toward the girls- including what she said was a sexual assault of her. she was also understandably suspicious in retrospect about a message which she had received from the father on 8 june 2021 which referred to the possibility that the children may “mix stories or get confused” (meb, p. 100). the mother will be criticised for aspects of how she dealt with the evolving situation- most particularly, for her subsequent questioning of [y] against the advice of cyps, and for not ensuring [x] was not exposed to and involved in conversations with [y] about what she said had occurred (the mother’s evidence about her efforts to protect [x] from what was going on is at t., p. 245-246). the court will not find that the mother “coached” the children- with all the implications that carries. rather, as she explained under cross-examination, she was trying to understand what may have happened. it is obviously a serious matter that [y] and [x] were interviewed the number of times that they were. the mother acknowledged this at t., p. 255, l. 19 & f. the mother was following the processes which were required (including a process for a further cyps appraisal after it was found that there were flaws in the first cyps appraisal). she had been reassured in the review of appraisal (mother’s exhibit book, p. 30)- “you naturally may be concerned your daughters are to be re-interviewed but for the purposes of ensuring safety it is pertinent that this is a part of the investigative process. appropriately trained case managers will conduct these interviews and create a child friendly environment for them to reduce any undue anxiety or stress.” she was in a very difficult situation and gave evidence that “i did what i thought was right” (t., p. 267, l.7). she identified that, in hindsight, she would have done some things differently (t., p. 267, l.3), including seeking advice from a counsellor (t., p. 267, l. 10 and f) and that she “could have asked [mr chadwick] if he had any idea why such a thing might have been said, and just let him know that that had come up...” (t., p. 267, l.27 and f). she admitted that she had found it difficult to separate her own experience from the children’s experience with the father (t., p. 267, l. 31 & f). she agreed that her ability to emotionally regulate during the last year has been negatively impacted (t., p. 243, l.7 & f). the mother was much more vigilant than she might have been in pursuing the matter with the relevant authorities- but it would not be fair to criticise her for that. having read all the documents, she queried the initial cyps and sacat investigations. she undoubtedly felt justified in that course when she received the review of appraisal referred to above which identified that there were a number of “deficiencies and errors in the process”. during the subsequent appraisal she notified cyps of what she believed were further disclosures (as she was asked to do). she was told the children had made further disclosures when interviewed at school (and without her knowledge) (mother’s affidavit filed 10 august 2022, para 9). she could not have done anything but wait for the outcome of the further appraisal. it is not at all surprising- given what she had heard, observed and been told- that she continued to believe sexual abuse had occurred. nonetheless, as soon as she received the final appraisal outcome letter, she gave instructions to seek orders restoring the children’s time. the fact that she seeks that outcome, notwithstanding she has not yet been able to let go of her genuine belief that there was sexual abuse, is courageous and is indicative of her willingness ultimately to accept the advice of cyps, and to act reasonably. [ms k] opined that it was not surprising, in all of the circumstances, that an adjustment of a long-held belief that [y] had been sexually abused by the father would not happen instantly (t., p. 330, l. 27), and would not occur in the circumstances of high stress in which the mother found herself (t., p. 330, l. 30 & f). she also agreed that “it would help the mother adjust her belief if she’s able to see the children adjusting well to returning to arranged time, spending time with the father” (t., p. 331, l. 5). under cross examination on the 2 september 2022 the mother could accept that it was a possibility that [y] had made up a story on 27 august, and that those stories got more outlandish because of the reaction she got from the mother (t., p. 261, l. 1 & f). she also acknowledged that her belief in the accuracy and truthfulness of [y]’s account “is already being challenged” and that “children that are that young can mix things up and, potentially, put things together” (t., p. 200, line 34 & f). the court will accept that the mother must have known that giving evidence that she still believed [y] had been sexually abused by the father would damage her case. nonetheless, she did as she was obliged to do and told the truth. the palpable honesty of her evidence would give the court confidence in the remainder of her evidence- including her evidence as to her intentions in relation to the girls’ relationships with their father. the following evidence of the mother will give the court some additional confidence that she is able to “move on” and support the children’s relationships with their father: that she thought it would be a “really good idea” for the parents to participate in a family therapy process (t., p.268, l.33 & f). [ms k] confirmed “that’s a positive” (t.,p. 33, l. 18). that she found the father’s evidence in response to counsel for the icl “quite moving actually and i was very hopeful to hear that [mr chadwick] seems to be coming from a place of forgiveness, even though i haven’t done anything wrong and i’ve acted to protect the girls. i am really pleased that he seems genuinely eager to try to co-parent and communicate and do the best for the girls” (t., p. 120, l.29 & f) that she wanted to have the same name as the children (“[chadwick]”) because she thinks “it’s good for their, you know, just their belonging” (t., p. 269, l.17 & f). her evidence that she does have positive things to say about the father, [ms b] and the children’s grandparents (t. p. 204, i.38). the maternal grandfather gave evidence that “[b]eing a law-abiding citizen, i intend to abide by the ruling of the court” (t., p. 294, l.2 & f). he also said that he would be at pains not to allow the children to pick up on his misgivings about the father (t., p. 295, l.19). the court has recognised- for example, in featherstone and adey [2018] fcca 754- that the fact that a parent genuinely believes the other parent is a risk to a child does not preclude the children benefiting from a meaningful relationship with the other parent while remaining living with the first parent- where the appropriate scaffolding orders are in place. in that case- unlike this one- the mother was seeking a finding of unacceptable risk and ongoing supervision. the court was not able to make a finding of unacceptable risk. as the court concluded in that case (at [155]): “the child’s relationship with the father needs to be re-built. this will take time and effort, and above all, as earlier stated, sensitivity, on all sides. it will very likely need professional assistance for both parents, albeit of different kinds. it will also need the families on both sides to support each parent. as always, the focus needs to be on the best interests of [x.]” the court will have greater confidence that can be achieved in this case- where the mother no longer seeks a finding of unacceptable risk, nor ongoing supervision. there are significant questions about whether the father is himself able to “move on”, protect the children from his views about the mother and support their relationship with her. as [ms k] opined, “if you’re talking about a reversal where it doesn’t ever get back to two parents, i would think that could be potentially very damaging” (t., p 341, l. 21 and f). while his evidence to counsel for the icl was of an attitude of forgiveness, under cross examination by counsel for the mother he did not resile from the extreme positions which he took in relation to the mother in his written response to cyps (this is at jtb, p. 136). his evidence relevant to this point included: he did not accept that [y] had said to the mother any of the things she said she had said- notwithstanding that the mother was not challenged that those things had been said (t., p. 37, l. 37 & f and p. 38, l.27). notwithstanding that his case was not run on the basis that the mother had made up allegations or sought to “alienate” the children from the father, he stood by his written statement to cyps and confirmed the following remained his views: that “these allegations are another example of [ms chadwick] deliberately, in a calculated manner, seeking to further alienate [y] and [x] from me” (t., p. 42, i. 27), “[ms chadwick] continues to utilise the systems and processes in place to protect persons who do require the valuable time of police and the courts in a manner that demonstrates she is a vexatious litigant” (t., p. 42, i. 40 & f), “[ms chadwick] is in my opinion, abusing the system set in place to protect actual victims of abuse, using them as a tool of devious intention to alienate children from a parent” (t., p. 44, i. 22). he stood by various extreme positions that he had taken in that response to cyps-including that the mother put images on the children’s device, and that she sent anonymous letters to him. none of this augurs well for the father’s ability to “move on”, protect the children from his views of the mother, and facilitate their relationship with her- and therefore tell against the drastic change which the father proposes. sight should not be lost of the father’s behaviour and issues with his parenting capacity in the shadow of what has occurred since august 2021. indeed, those become particularly significant because of the parenting capacity and skill that will be needed if the court does make the orders sought by the father. prior to august 2021 this was a matter which involved a dispute as to whether there should be a return to an equal time arrangement (as the father sought), or a 10/4 arrangement (as the mother sought). the mother had demonstrated her willingness to facilitate the girls’ relationship with their father to the extent that she had agreed to an equal time arrangement for them for a time. [ms k] agreed that the fact that she did that- notwithstanding the children were young and that she gave evidence that the father had used family violence- was positive (t., p. 332, l. 44 & f). as the father acknowledged, the mother had even proposed and agreed to a “nesting” arrangement immediately after separation (t., p 53, l. 17 & f). the court will find that the father’s behaviour contributed to the breakdown of the equal time arrangement. the parties and children attended upon family consultant on 30 october 2020 (the cic memorandum is at jtb, p. 9)- well before there were any questions about sexual abuse. [x] is reported as raising a number of matters about her father which go to his parenting capacity- including that he was having “lots of chats with me saying, ‘be careful what you say because you will never be able to do fun things with me again’” (para 38) and as yelling, being angry and rude (para 41). the father communicated with the mother and with her parents abrasively. he was cross examined about his communication with the mother in the letter which is at jtb, p. 256 at t., p. 55—56 and was unable to accept that his communication was not conducive to a cooperative co-parenting relationship. he admitted that his telephoning the mother 18 times within a short period of time was inappropriate and that the mother would have found it harassing (t., p .58, l. 5 & f). the series of events around those telephone calls in august 2020 was put to the father at t., p. 86 & f. separately, and when what [x] was reported as saying in the cic memorandum was put to him, he admitted that he had made [x] frightened at times and that [x] experienced him yelling (t., p. 61, l. 5 & f). his letter to the mother’s parents at jtb, p. 249 is abrasive and unnecessary. the mother gave detailed evidence of the father’s behaviour towards her while they were together (mother’s affidavit filed 29 march 2022, paras 125-168). the message sent by the mother to the father in 2015 while the parties were still in a loving relationship is at meb, p. 132 and is consistent with her evidence that she experienced the father’s behaviour as angry, impatient and frightening at times. the father conceded in cross examination that the mother’s sentiments expressed there did reflect her actual experience (t., p. 84, l. 25 & f). the mother also told her psychologist in november 2019 about what she described as “unpredictable behaviour” by the father, and as early as november 2019 contacted dvcs about the father’s behaviour (the mother’s psychologist’s notes are at jtb, pp. 257-287 and dvcs notes are 298-302). that the mother was prepared to agree to an equal time arrangement even in the face of that behaviour is indicative of her willingness to support the children’s relationship with the father. the father has been seeking orders for a change of residence since january of this year, and yet gave very limited evidence about how he would make his proposed arrangements work. he acknowledged under cross examination that he would need professional assistance, but was not able to provide any details (t., pp. 31-33). he acknowledged that he had given no evidence about practical arrangements for the care of [x] and [y] (t., p. 32, l. 43), no evidence about his accommodation, nor any evidence about how he understands the children’s experience would be, or how he would help the children cope with separation from their mother (t., p. 33, l.4 & f). his oral evidence would not give the court any confidence that he has given any real forethought to how he would meet the unparalleled challenges to him and the girls of the orders which he seeks be made. he even resisted accepting the proposing that, if those orders are made, he would have “two very confused, distressed little girls” on his hands (t., p. 35, lines, 44 & f onto p. 36). the father acknowledged that he would need professional assistance. the court will find based on the [m contact centre] documents which are at jtb p. 311 and following that, in july 2021, the children’s counsellor [mr ar] formed the view that the father had an “extreme reaction and dysregulation when discussing kids and [n program]” and decided that it should be the maternal grandmother who brought the children (p. 316). the father then engaged in an unhelpful way with [mr ar] - sending him the emails which are at p. 318, 320 and 322 of the jtb. this is the only evidence that the court has about the father’s engagement with services for the children- and again does not augur well. the father admitted that he had considered “walking away” on several occasions (t., p.71. i. 20 & f) and, notwithstanding the court’s urging, he did not take up opportunities to spend time supervised with the children. these matters go to s.60cc(3)(c). in addition to the matters raised above, there are significant and relevant (having regard to the s.60cc(3) factors) disadvantages of making the orders sought by the father, including: the undoubted trauma to the children of such a drastic change in their living arrangements (s.60cc(3)d) of course requiring consideration of the likely effect of changes in circumstances). [ms k] agreed that it would be an “enormous change” for the children and “potentially bewildering” (t., p. 335, i. 12 & f) and that “it’s a huge reversal” (t., p. 341, i. 20). [ms k] agreed that a change of residence could be “potentially very disastrous for the girls” (t., p. 341, i. 30). that they provide for an arrangement which is the opposite of what the children have said they want and that the children may simply not tolerate the change. the children were not even asked by [ms k] their views about a change in residence- presumably because their views could be assumed and because even considering such a proposal would be very distressing for them. [ms k] agreed with counsel for the mother that the arrangements could potentially be completely unworkable (t., p. 341, i. 45). that the children may blame themselves (and/or each other) for the change- with all the psychological and relationship implications of that. [ms k] accepted that it’s likely that [y] or [x] might work out that a change of residence was somehow linked to [y]’s disclosures and that “potentially” [y] might feel guilty and blame herself for what has happened (t., p. 335, i. 42 & f). that the children may resent and/or blame the father and/or mother for the change- and reject them or one of them ([ms k] gave evidence that the girls being resentful of one or both parents “would be the least of it. i’m sure there would be resentment anyway” (t., p. 341, i. 36 & f)). that the father is simply unable to meet the challenge of the parenting arrangements he seeks. [ms k] effectively qualified her opinion about the extent to which he could by noting that it was only “from what i saw of the father, which admittedly is not a lot” (t., p. 342, i. 2). the evidence about the father’s capacity is also limited by the fact that [ms k] did not observe the father with the children. the matters raised at paragraphs 26-30 above go to his capacity. that there is a strong likelihood of further litigation (such must be almost certain if the court makes the orders sought by the father) and the process of repair which needs to occur for this family will not be able to occur. the court will readily accept that a parent faced with what may be disclosures by a young child of sexual abuse by the child’s other parent is in a very difficult position. there is no “rule book” for how to behave. the mother in this case followed the steps she was required to take in relation to sacat and cyps processes. she had concerns about the first cyps appraisal, and followed up vigorously in relation to those concerns. she was then provided with a letter from a senior official in cyps which vindicated her concerns about the process. she awaited the outcome of the further appraisal which was ordered by cyps and complied with their directions. having received that appraisal outcome, she has adopted the recommendation that the focus be on restoring relationships. she has given honest evidence to the court that she is not able to accept sexual abuse by the father did not occur (noting that cyps was not able to establish whether sexual abuse had or had not occurred). nonetheless, she accepts that the focus should now be on the restoration of relationships and has welcomed the father’s evidence to the icl about approaching the matter from the perspective of “forgiveness”. she has consented to interim orders which commence that repair process. the court would not adopt the drastic and unnecessary alternative proposed by the father, this is not a “last resort” situation.
written submissions by the independent children’s lawyer
legal principles the principles relating to the assessment of risk of harm were recently discussed by the full court in isles & neilssen [sic] [2022] fedcfamc1a 97. a summary of those principles is: (a) part vii proceedings are premised upon proof of relevant facts and circumstances by evidence, but the law draws a distinction between proof of historical facts and the prediction of future possibilities, (b) findings of historical facts must be made on the balance of probabilities, (c) the court, when hypothesising about future possibilities, can be influenced by factual findings of past events, (d) unacceptable risk may be determined by a cumulative consideration of factors, which is a predictive or prospective exercise for the court, (e) at some point on the continuum of chance, the risk of harm becomes so potent it cannot be tolerated: it is unacceptable, (f) depending on the strength of evidence put before the court, the possibility of past sexual abuse may of itself be sufficient to establish the chance of future sexual abuse, and (g) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary. the mother’s allegations against the father whilst the mother no longer asks the court to make a finding that the father presents as an unacceptable risk of harm to her children, her belief that he had sexually abused [y], ‘groomed’ [x] and was, in fact, a paedophile remained. the court is left in an invidious position of trying to reconcile her evidence against the application for which she now contends. both parents accepted [y] has always had an active imagination, and that she likes to engage in independent and dramatic play. the mother accepted it was possible that [y] had associated making statements about her father doing bad things to her with the positive reinforcement she receives immediately thereafter from her mother. [ms k] also accepted that this was entirely possible. the icl joins with the submissions made by the father about the significant issues with the mother’s evidence (at afs [11]-[16]). the other major difficulty is the nature and content of the disclosures. the wording used by [y] is peculiar and not the usual language of a four or five year old child. the other concern both the authorities and [ms k] had with the disclosures were that [y] was unable to elaborate on them, which is usually a sign of coaching. [ms k] also opined that the level of repetition of the same disclosure for a child is extremely unusual. [y]’s teacher [ms as] told the case worker at cyps, “well when shes [sic] with mum sometimes we over hear [sic] her saying things to her friends saying daddy doesn’t live with us because he lies to us which isn’t normal language for a 5 year old”. both [x] and [y] were recorded as reporting to the school that they do not like going to stay with their father, but their behaviour at school – running to greet him, crying when separated from him – contraindicates any real issue and their presentation remained consistent across both parent days. the father’s allegations against the mother the father has concerns about the mother’s mental health following her reaction and subsequent actions taken after the alleged disclosures. put bluntly, the father would not propound his contended orders if he thought there was another way to fix the breakdown in his relationship with his children, and his co-parenting relationship with the mother. the mother said on at least seven occasions through her evidence that she “wished there was another explanation” for the alleged disclosures made by [y]. however, when taken to the factual improbability – and indeed, impossibility – of some of the “disclosures”, the mother maintained her belief that somehow what [y] had reported to her indicated sexual abuse by her father. the mother’s attitude was to attribute a sinister meaning to the things [y] allegedly said to her. for example, a childhood nightmare is categorised as a “flashback”, a reference to a “ghost” is sperm ejaculation. inevitably, rather than taking a rational and measured view toward her child’s musings and potentially imaginative stories, she chose a nefarious overlay which coloured what [y] had said to her to fit her narrative of sexual abuse. it is perhaps not a coincidence that the first of the alleged disclosures occurred in very close proximity to the incident where after a number of missed phone calls by the father, the children (apparently of their own volition) were so scared, they hid in the cupboard in their bedroom. the mother accepted the children are perceptive and alive to any change in her emotions. there is no explanation for why she did not simply take the phone call and walk away from her children to protect them, to provide a physical barrier between any conflict that may have been occurring between her and their father. this example is demonstrative of the mother’s inability to appropriately separate her feelings about the father from her children’s, her inability to separate her experience of the father from her children’s, her inability to create healthy, age appropriate and necessary parental boundaries within her own relationship with the children. this inability impacts on her capacity to parent these children, and certainly co-parent with the father, as she proposes. the mother’s conduct in relation to the impact this matter has had on [x] is perhaps even more troubling: (a) first, she has submitted [x] (who has made no disclosures, and who she says the father has not sexually abused) to eight interviews of a period of 14 months, a gruelling process for which she takes no responsibility – presumably because she believes the end justifies the means. while it is true cyps found issues with the first interview process, the mother’s repeated requests for the children to be re-interviewed were made before she received that letter, (b) secondly, she gave no evidence, other than what was elicited through cross-examination of how she has supported [x] or explained why she is no longer spending time with her dad – other than telling her it’s “to keep her safe”. in her mountain of repetitive and otiose evidence, the mother provides excruciating detail about how she is preparing [x] –who is 9 – for her period (the relevance of which escapes the reader) rather than detailing how she has managed [x]’s understanding of the care arrangements for the last 12 months and why she went from spending significant and substantial time with her father to having no contact at all in the space of one week, (c) thirdly, she has allowed [x] to be present whilst [y] allegedly made disclosures and insisted she be interviewed and subjected to trauma counselling, and (d) fourthly, it is [x], and not [y], who appears to be having the most difficulty re-engaging with the father. [x] was observed to be crying and “pulled her hoody up over her face”, and within 15 minutes of her arrival, “[x] had totally withdrawn and was crying uncontrollably.” [ms k’s] impression of the parties and their support persons whom she interviewed was consistent with the way they presented in the witness box the primary considerations meaningful relationship and risk of harm the mother says the court does not need to find there is risk of harm in either household and that her proposal will allow for the children to develop and maintain a meaningful relationship with their father. the expert opined that there is a possibility the mother’s proposal could work, but it was dependent on three crucial factors: (a) both the mother, father and children receiving focused assistance, either by way of counselling therapeutic intervention or psychological assistance (in the mother’s case), (b) the mother convincing the children that she had made a mistake about the father and what happened, that it was all a horrible misunderstanding, and they are now safe to spend time with their father, and (c) the father is quickly reinstated as a significant parent. the expert confirmed it was a ‘last resort’ to change the residence of the children and should only be explored if all other options are not viable. the icl’s concern is that the report from [g contact centre] seems a troubling development, although it must be noted that it was the first contact visit and therefore things may progress more smoothly in the future. the difficulty for the court is that the mother’s attitude has not changed. she is steadfast in her belief the father is a paedophile and is a risk to her children. when such a belief is firmly held, it is hard to contemplate how the three crucial factors outlined by the expert could ever come to fruition. the last thing the children need is for these legal proceedings to be reinstated after the mother’s orders fail. the father’s proposal is also fraught with the possibility that the children will suffer due to the drastic change in their living arrangements and their psychological response to such a change, given the beliefs they may now hold about their father. the father impressed as a concerned father who was distraught at the allegations which have been raised against him. he was measured and told the court he had forgiven the mother for the allegations put against him. he appeared to be self-aware and demonstrated insight into how his direct communication style can sometimes be confronting to others. the father, unprompted, was quick to credit the children’s creativity (“a wonderful attribute”) to the mother. this accords with the expert’s view that the father would be able to facilitate the children’s relationship with the mother, should they reside with him. the mother presented as highly anxious and concerned about her children. there is no question she enjoys a meaningful relationship with her daughters. whilst it was submitted she ought not be criticised for following up the appraisals “vigorously” (ms [29]), it is not her pursuit of an investigation which causes concern, it was her failure to shield and protect her children from that very adult process. it is true there is no “rule book” for these sorts of allegations, but the mother had competent legal representation throughout this process, she had the benefit of [ms k’s] report from april 2022, she had access to a psychologist (although she did not utilise that service), and she had experts in the child sexual abuse field giving her advice which she wilfully ignored. if past behaviour is the best predictor of future behaviour, it is hard to contemplate how there is any other option but to have a moratorium of time so that the children can become adjusted – without the mother’s influence (whether it be intentional or subconscious) – to having a relationship with their father. that time apart will also mean the mother can have the benefit of some targeted psychological intervention to work through her feelings and beliefs as concerns the father and the events since august 2020. these two girls need both of their parents. the father’s proposal, which is adopted by the icl, is the only viable way the relationship between the children and the father can be repaired. conclusion the orders proposed in the icl’s minute of order are not recommended to the court lightly. the icl has very grave concerns about the mother’s anxiety and her ability to facilitate these little girls’ relationship with their father. the effect on [x] is already apparent. icl exhibit 10 of the “[g contact centre]” report underlines the damage and emotional harm the mother and this process has caused [x]. [y] appears to be following her sister’s lead. the path ahead for these parties and their children is a long and difficult one. the path needs, in the icl’s view, to involve the following key components: (d) counselling between the parents (whilst this is not an order which can be made on a final basis, it is something both parents readily agreed to under cross-examination and should be implemented as soon as possible), (e) focused and consistent counselling for the children, and (f) a period of time without contact with the mother to enable the children to rebuild their relationship with their father.   part vii proceedings are premised upon proof of relevant facts and circumstances by evidence, but the law draws a distinction between proof of historical facts and the prediction of future possibilities, (b) findings of historical facts must be made on the balance of probabilities, (c) the court, when hypothesising about future possibilities, can be influenced by factual findings of past events, (d) unacceptable risk may be determined by a cumulative consideration of factors, which is a predictive or prospective exercise for the court, (e) at some point on the continuum of chance, the risk of harm becomes so potent it cannot be tolerated: it is unacceptable, (f) depending on the strength of evidence put before the court, the possibility of past sexual abuse may of itself be sufficient to establish the chance of future sexual abuse, and (g) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary.   findings of historical facts must be made on the balance of probabilities, (c) the court, when hypothesising about future possibilities, can be influenced by factual findings of past events, (d) unacceptable risk may be determined by a cumulative consideration of factors, which is a predictive or prospective exercise for the court, (e) at some point on the continuum of chance, the risk of harm becomes so potent it cannot be tolerated: it is unacceptable, (f) depending on the strength of evidence put before the court, the possibility of past sexual abuse may of itself be sufficient to establish the chance of future sexual abuse, and (g) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary.   the court, when hypothesising about future possibilities, can be influenced by factual findings of past events, (d) unacceptable risk may be determined by a cumulative consideration of factors, which is a predictive or prospective exercise for the court, (e) at some point on the continuum of chance, the risk of harm becomes so potent it cannot be tolerated: it is unacceptable, (f) depending on the strength of evidence put before the court, the possibility of past sexual abuse may of itself be sufficient to establish the chance of future sexual abuse, and (g) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary.   unacceptable risk may be determined by a cumulative consideration of factors, which is a predictive or prospective exercise for the court, (e) at some point on the continuum of chance, the risk of harm becomes so potent it cannot be tolerated: it is unacceptable, (f) depending on the strength of evidence put before the court, the possibility of past sexual abuse may of itself be sufficient to establish the chance of future sexual abuse, and (g) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary.   at some point on the continuum of chance, the risk of harm becomes so potent it cannot be tolerated: it is unacceptable, (f) depending on the strength of evidence put before the court, the possibility of past sexual abuse may of itself be sufficient to establish the chance of future sexual abuse, and (g) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary.   depending on the strength of evidence put before the court, the possibility of past sexual abuse may of itself be sufficient to establish the chance of future sexual abuse, and (g) the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary.   the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary.   first, she has submitted [x] (who has made no disclosures, and who she says the father has not sexually abused) to eight interviews of a period of 14 months, a gruelling process for which she takes no responsibility – presumably because she believes the end justifies the means. while it is true cyps found issues with the first interview process, the mother’s repeated requests for the children to be re-interviewed were made before she received that letter, (b) secondly, she gave no evidence, other than what was elicited through cross-examination of how she has supported [x] or explained why she is no longer spending time with her dad – other than telling her it’s “to keep her safe”. in her mountain of repetitive and otiose evidence, the mother provides excruciating detail about how she is preparing [x] –who is 9 – for her period (the relevance of which escapes the reader) rather than detailing how she has managed [x]’s understanding of the care arrangements for the last 12 months and why she went from spending significant and substantial time with her father to having no contact at all in the space of one week, (c) thirdly, she has allowed [x] to be present whilst [y] allegedly made disclosures and insisted she be interviewed and subjected to trauma counselling, and (d) fourthly, it is [x], and not [y], who appears to be having the most difficulty re-engaging with the father. [x] was observed to be crying and “pulled her hoody up over her face”, and within 15 minutes of her arrival, “[x] had totally withdrawn and was crying uncontrollably.”   secondly, she gave no evidence, other than what was elicited through cross-examination of how she has supported [x] or explained why she is no longer spending time with her dad – other than telling her it’s “to keep her safe”. in her mountain of repetitive and otiose evidence, the mother provides excruciating detail about how she is preparing [x] –who is 9 – for her period (the relevance of which escapes the reader) rather than detailing how she has managed [x]’s understanding of the care arrangements for the last 12 months and why she went from spending significant and substantial time with her father to having no contact at all in the space of one week, (c) thirdly, she has allowed [x] to be present whilst [y] allegedly made disclosures and insisted she be interviewed and subjected to trauma counselling, and (d) fourthly, it is [x], and not [y], who appears to be having the most difficulty re-engaging with the father. [x] was observed to be crying and “pulled her hoody up over her face”, and within 15 minutes of her arrival, “[x] had totally withdrawn and was crying uncontrollably.”   thirdly, she has allowed [x] to be present whilst [y] allegedly made disclosures and insisted she be interviewed and subjected to trauma counselling, and (d) fourthly, it is [x], and not [y], who appears to be having the most difficulty re-engaging with the father. [x] was observed to be crying and “pulled her hoody up over her face”, and within 15 minutes of her arrival, “[x] had totally withdrawn and was crying uncontrollably.”   fourthly, it is [x], and not [y], who appears to be having the most difficulty re-engaging with the father. [x] was observed to be crying and “pulled her hoody up over her face”, and within 15 minutes of her arrival, “[x] had totally withdrawn and was crying uncontrollably.”   both the mother, father and children receiving focused assistance, either by way of counselling therapeutic intervention or psychological assistance (in the mother’s case), (b) the mother convincing the children that she had made a mistake about the father and what happened, that it was all a horrible misunderstanding, and they are now safe to spend time with their father, and (c) the father is quickly reinstated as a significant parent.   the mother convincing the children that she had made a mistake about the father and what happened, that it was all a horrible misunderstanding, and they are now safe to spend time with their father, and (c) the father is quickly reinstated as a significant parent.   the father is quickly reinstated as a significant parent.   counselling between the parents (whilst this is not an order which can be made on a final basis, it is something both parents readily agreed to under cross-examination and should be implemented as soon as possible), (e) focused and consistent counselling for the children, and (f) a period of time without contact with the mother to enable the children to rebuild their relationship with their father.   focused and consistent counselling for the children, and (f) a period of time without contact with the mother to enable the children to rebuild their relationship with their father.   a period of time without contact with the mother to enable the children to rebuild their relationship with their father.
outline of principle
principles regarding parenting 4] the problems that family law legislation deals with are human problems: with all their attendant variety and complexity. and at the end of a court proceeding under such legislation, a judge must make an order - usually an order that says yes or no to some application. "[a] complicated mass of human experience has to be reduced to the simplest possible terms." because the problems are human problems, because they are as varied and complicated as they are, the legislature speaks in terms more often found in statements of aspiration than legal prescription. it is, then, hardly surprising that the guiding principles prescribed by the legislation for application in cases concerning the guardianship or custody of children or related issues, are principles that seldom, if ever, permit syllogistic reasoning. [205] further, when considering the reasons given by a judge who has made an order in an application about the guardianship or custody of children, it is necessary to bear steadily in mind that the judge must grapple with the chaotic complexity of real life, make predictions not only of what he or she concludes may happen in future but also of what will be "best" for the child, and do so having regard to what the parties have chosen to contest or emphasise in the course of the hearing.
in most cases about parenting orders under the family law act there is no conceptual difficulty in the court applying the principle that the best interests of the child are the paramount consideration. however, that is not so when deciding upon orders in what have become known as “relocation cases”. that is because, when in relocation cases regard is also had to another consideration, namely the right to freedom of movement of a parent, a delicate interplay of concepts arises. that is on the most favourable view of it. on another view, that to which i incline, the result is an imbroglio of principles.
on the one hand, the appellate court is obliged to “give the judgment which in its opinion ought to have been given in the first instance.” on the other, it must, of necessity, observe the “natural limitations” that exist in the case of any appellate court proceeding wholly or substantially on the record. these limitations include the disadvantage that the appellate court has when compared with the trial judge in respect of the evaluation of witnesses' credibility and of the “feeling” of a case which an appellate court, reading the transcript, cannot always fully share. furthermore, the appellate court does not typically get taken to, or read, all of the evidence taken at the trial. commonly, the trial judge therefore has advantages that derive from the obligation at trial to receive and consider the entirety of the evidence and the opportunity, normally over a longer interval, to reflect upon that evidence and to draw conclusions from it, viewed as a whole.
... [a] primary judge [is] obliged to give sufficient reasons to explain the overall result: not to explain every forensic step in reaching that result.   the provisions in the family law act 1975 (the act) relating to children rest on twin pillars. the first is the importance to children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm. these are stressed in s.60b(1) which sets out the objects of the legislation relating to children and are reiterated as the primary considerations in s.60cc(1). [4] when deciding what parenting orders to make it is the best interests of the children which are the paramount consideration. in determining where those best interests lie, the court must consider the primary and additional considerations set out in s.60cc. [5] there is a presumption that it is in a child’s best interests for his or her parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for him or her (s.61da). the presumption relates to the allocation of parental responsibility, not the time a child spends with each parent. the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent has engaged in abuse of the child or family violence. the presumption may be rebutted if the court finds that it would not be in the best interests of the child for it to apply. [6] if the presumption applies, and there is an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the court must consider whether spending equal time with each parent would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(1)) and, if no such order is made, consider whether spending substantial and significant time with each would be in the child’s best interests (s.65daa(2))  ] the family law amendment (shared parental responsibility) bill revised explanatory memorandum (2006) refers to the concept of a meaningful relationship on a number of occasions. at para 52 it noted that the primary factors mirror the first two objects set out in the new s 60b and that the objects are elevated to primary considerations as they deal with important rights of children and encourage a child-focused approach. the paragraph continues:
the elevation of the object relating to the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both parents is consistent with the introduction of a presumption in favour of equal shared parental responsibility.  ] here, the concept of a meaningful relationship is closely tied with the introduction of the presumption of equal shared responsibility, and the passage links the concept of a meaningful relationship with the objects of the division. the objects use the words “meaningful involvement”. [22] at para 128, discussion of a meaningful relationship is again linked to discussion of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility, the explanatory memorandum noting:
the government considers that it is important to ensure that a child has a meaningful relationship with both parents and that both parents participate in decisions about the child. the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility is not a presumption of 50:50 joint custody. the presumption relates solely to the decision making responsibilities of both parents. new section 65aa inserted by item 31 is the provision dealing with the time a child spends with each parent and the circumstances where the court should consider equal time arrangements.  ] when considering s 65daa, the explanatory memorandum states (at [196]–[199]):  6] subsection 65daa(2) recognises that an equal time arrangement will not be appropriate in some cases but that the court must consider other arrangements that promote a meaningful relationship. this provision places an obligation on the court in situations where there is equal shared parental responsibility and equal time is not appropriate, to consider whether it would be in the best interests of the child and reasonably practicable for the child to spend substantial and significant time with both parents. this is intended to ensure that in making parenting orders related to time that the court focuses not just on the substantial quantity of time that is spent with each parent, but also on the significant type of time. the note in this section emphasises that the best interests of the chid remain the paramount consideration for parenting orders. this is set out in s 60ca by item 9. ... [199] section 65daa (2) — (4) is intended to ensure that the courts consider arrangements that are much more than “1 weekend a fortnight and half of the holidays” or an 80:20 arrangement. it is intended to ensure a focus both on the amount of time and the type of time. it would include both day time contact and night time contact. it recognises that what is important is that the focus be on ways that both parents are able to develop a meaningful relationships with their children and share important events including everyday time with the child. it recognises that in order to have a meaningful relationship and to share equal shared responsibility that this would generally involve “both” parents spending both substantial and significant time with their children.  ] the new shorter oxford english dictionary on historical principles, clarendon press, oxford, 1993, defines “meaningful” as “full of meaning or expression, significant, amenable to interpretation, having a recognisable function in a language or sign system, able to function as a term in such a system”. “meaning” is defined as “having intention or purpose, chiefly with a qualifying adverb (as well-meaning)”. a second definition is “conveying or expressing meaning or thought, expressive, meaningful, significant, suggestive”. these definitions are repeated and further fleshed out in the oxford english dictionary, 2nd ed, clarendon press, oxford, 1989. it defines “meaning” (in generalised use) as “significance”. the examples provided take the matter no further. [25] the macquarie dictionary, 4th ed, macquarie university press, sydney, 2005, defines meaningful as “full of meaning, significant”. within the definitions of meaning, the relevant one defines the word as “expressive or significant: a meaning look”. [26] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive [sic] one. quantitive [sic] concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.
we also observe that in champness & hanson [2009] famcafc 96, (2009) flc 93-407 the full court (thackray, o’ryan & benjamin jj) observed at [103]:
the submissions of counsel for the father also appeared at times to be based on an assumption that it was obligatory for the trial judge to make the orders most likely to ensure the children had a “meaningful relationship” with both parents. this is an incorrect assumption. the court’s obligation is to make the orders most likely to promote the child’s best interests. in seeking to achieve that objective, s 60cc(2)(a) directs the court to consider “the benefit to the child” of having a meaningful relationship with both parents. even if such a benefit is established, it must still be weighed along with all of the other relevant factors. (see bennett j’s analysis in g & c [2006] famca 994) (emphasis in original).
the full court also observed at [191]: “the first and very important observation we would make about this complaint is that the expression ‘meaningful relationship’ is a legal construct, not a psychological one. it is for the court, not an expert, to determine what constitutes a ‘meaningful relationship’ ”.
principles regarding “risk”  long ago, in parenting proceedings characterised by one parent’s allegation that the other had sexually abused their child, the high court of australia (“the high court”) emphasised the distinction between two very different things: on the one hand, proving alleged sexual abuse according to the civil standard of proof and, on the other, establishing the risk of the feared sexual abuse occurring in the future: (m v m (1988) 166 clr 69 [2] in respect of the first issue, the high court said (at 76):
in considering an allegation of sexual abuse, the court should not make a positive finding that the allegation is true unless the court is so satisfied according to the civil standard of proof, with due regard to the factors mentioned in briginshaw v. briginshaw.(footnote omitted)   the reference to briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34, (1938) 60 clr 336 was the endorsement of an earlier enunciation of the common law principle of the civil standard of proof, now enshrined within s.140 of the evidence act 1995 (cth) (“the evidence act”). [4] in relation to the second question pertaining to risk, the high court said (at 77–78):
... [t]he court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assess the magnitude of that risk. ... [t]he test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.   but the high court did not elaborate how the alleged risk of abuse would be established on the evidence before the court. [6] in the years which have since elapsed, this court has on occasions posited that the risk of such abuse (and hence the risk of consequent harm to the child) must be proven on the balance of probabilities according to the civil standard of proof, in just the same way as facts are proven. we consider that statement of principle to be incorrect and now state it to be so, fully recognising the caution which should attend any departure from earlier authoritative decisions (nguyen v nguyen (1990) 169 clr 245 at 269). [7] m v m put beyond doubt the proposition that courts exercising jurisdiction under pt vii of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”) must protect children from credible risks of harm due to sexual abuse. such risks, like all prospective events, are capable of classification in only one of three mutually exclusive categories: possibilities, probabilities, or certainties. once it is accepted courts should (and do) react to dangers in the form of risks of harm which may merely be possibilities, it is an oxymoron to expect such possibilities to then be forensically proven on the balance of probabilities according to the civil standard of proof. by definition, possibilities are not, and could never be, probabilities. risks of harm are not susceptible of scientific demonstration or proof (cdj v vaj (1998) 197 clr 172 at [151]), but are instead postulated from known historical facts and present circumstances.
the assessment of risk is a predictive exercise and while it is, naturally enough, liable to be influenced by factual findings about past events, the contemplation of risk entails the foresight of possible harm. it is an oddity to expect that the mere possibility of future harm can or should be proven as a probability, as has been implied before. risks of harm must be heeded even if they are improbable eventualities.
the law draws a distinction between proof of historical facts and the prediction of future possibilities. in determining what did or did not happen in the past, a court decides on the balance of probabilities, but not when hypothesising about future possibilities.
the assessment of risk is an evidence-based conclusion and is not discretionary. the finding about whether an unacceptable risk exists, based on known facts and circumstances, is either open on the evidence or it is not. it is only the overall judgment, expressed in the form of orders made in the children’s best interests, which entails an exercise of discretion: that discretionary judgment is influenced by the various material considerations enumerated within s 60cc of the act, of which the evidence-based finding made about the existence of any unacceptable risk of harm is but one.
consideration and disposition
issues of risk
parenting matters  neither parent is to discuss the orders of the court with the children, except to inform them that, for a time, (a) they are to live with the father, (b) they will be in regular contact with the mother, and (c) among other things, the mother will be undertaking some support treatment, (ii) by 4pm on 4th april 2023, the parties and the icl are to inform the court what arrangements have been made to transition the children, x and y, into their father’s primary care. that transition is to take place by no later than 5pm on 5th april 2023, (iii) on 6th april 2023, the father is to arrange for the children to attend at the registry of the court so that the head of the family consultants may have a general discussion with the children about their general living situation and the “spend-time-with” arrangements with the mother, (iv) within 1 month from the date of these orders, the mother is to inform the icl and the court what arrangements she has put in place regarding psychological counselling to deal with the matters addressed in the reasons of the court, (v) for a period of one month after the date of these orders, the mother may call the children once per week (day and time to be agreed in writing between the parties), and the children may call the mother for a maximum additional two times per week, (vi) for the second month after the date of these orders, the mother may spend up to six hours with the children, one day each weekend (for a period of 4 weeks, day and times to be agreed in writing), but such time-with the mother must be supervised by an independent person (or organisation) and a brief report provided to the icl and to the court after each session, (vii) assuming that there are no relevant issues with the mother’s time with the children according to the reports of the supervisor (set out in the previous paragraph), then the children are to spend time with the mother, for a period of six months, one overnight each alternate weekend (day and times to be agreed in writing), (viii) after that six month period, for a further period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until 4 pm sunday, (ix) after the conclusion of that period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school on the monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half school holidays. (x) it is requested the icl remain in the matter for the next 12 months and provide a note to the court every 3 months as to how matters are progressing with the children on all relevant fronts. (xi) the icl is granted liberty to relist the matter on short notice to the parties and to the court should the need to do so arise.  ) by 4pm on 4th april 2023, the parties and the icl are to inform the court what arrangements have been made to transition the children, x and y, into their father’s primary care. that transition is to take place by no later than 5pm on 5th april 2023, (iii) on 6th april 2023, the father is to arrange for the children to attend at the registry of the court so that the head of the family consultants may have a general discussion with the children about their general living situation and the “spend-time-with” arrangements with the mother, (iv) within 1 month from the date of these orders, the mother is to inform the icl and the court what arrangements she has put in place regarding psychological counselling to deal with the matters addressed in the reasons of the court, (v) for a period of one month after the date of these orders, the mother may call the children once per week (day and time to be agreed in writing between the parties), and the children may call the mother for a maximum additional two times per week, (vi) for the second month after the date of these orders, the mother may spend up to six hours with the children, one day each weekend (for a period of 4 weeks, day and times to be agreed in writing), but such time-with the mother must be supervised by an independent person (or organisation) and a brief report provided to the icl and to the court after each session, (vii) assuming that there are no relevant issues with the mother’s time with the children according to the reports of the supervisor (set out in the previous paragraph), then the children are to spend time with the mother, for a period of six months, one overnight each alternate weekend (day and times to be agreed in writing), (viii) after that six month period, for a further period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until 4 pm sunday, (ix) after the conclusion of that period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school on the monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half school holidays. (x) it is requested the icl remain in the matter for the next 12 months and provide a note to the court every 3 months as to how matters are progressing with the children on all relevant fronts. (xi) the icl is granted liberty to relist the matter on short notice to the parties and to the court should the need to do so arise.  i) on 6th april 2023, the father is to arrange for the children to attend at the registry of the court so that the head of the family consultants may have a general discussion with the children about their general living situation and the “spend-time-with” arrangements with the mother, (iv) within 1 month from the date of these orders, the mother is to inform the icl and the court what arrangements she has put in place regarding psychological counselling to deal with the matters addressed in the reasons of the court, (v) for a period of one month after the date of these orders, the mother may call the children once per week (day and time to be agreed in writing between the parties), and the children may call the mother for a maximum additional two times per week, (vi) for the second month after the date of these orders, the mother may spend up to six hours with the children, one day each weekend (for a period of 4 weeks, day and times to be agreed in writing), but such time-with the mother must be supervised by an independent person (or organisation) and a brief report provided to the icl and to the court after each session, (vii) assuming that there are no relevant issues with the mother’s time with the children according to the reports of the supervisor (set out in the previous paragraph), then the children are to spend time with the mother, for a period of six months, one overnight each alternate weekend (day and times to be agreed in writing), (viii) after that six month period, for a further period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until 4 pm sunday, (ix) after the conclusion of that period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school on the monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half school holidays. (x) it is requested the icl remain in the matter for the next 12 months and provide a note to the court every 3 months as to how matters are progressing with the children on all relevant fronts. (xi) the icl is granted liberty to relist the matter on short notice to the parties and to the court should the need to do so arise.  ) within 1 month from the date of these orders, the mother is to inform the icl and the court what arrangements she has put in place regarding psychological counselling to deal with the matters addressed in the reasons of the court, (v) for a period of one month after the date of these orders, the mother may call the children once per week (day and time to be agreed in writing between the parties), and the children may call the mother for a maximum additional two times per week, (vi) for the second month after the date of these orders, the mother may spend up to six hours with the children, one day each weekend (for a period of 4 weeks, day and times to be agreed in writing), but such time-with the mother must be supervised by an independent person (or organisation) and a brief report provided to the icl and to the court after each session, (vii) assuming that there are no relevant issues with the mother’s time with the children according to the reports of the supervisor (set out in the previous paragraph), then the children are to spend time with the mother, for a period of six months, one overnight each alternate weekend (day and times to be agreed in writing), (viii) after that six month period, for a further period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until 4 pm sunday, (ix) after the conclusion of that period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school on the monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half school holidays. (x) it is requested the icl remain in the matter for the next 12 months and provide a note to the court every 3 months as to how matters are progressing with the children on all relevant fronts. (xi) the icl is granted liberty to relist the matter on short notice to the parties and to the court should the need to do so arise.   for a period of one month after the date of these orders, the mother may call the children once per week (day and time to be agreed in writing between the parties), and the children may call the mother for a maximum additional two times per week, (vi) for the second month after the date of these orders, the mother may spend up to six hours with the children, one day each weekend (for a period of 4 weeks, day and times to be agreed in writing), but such time-with the mother must be supervised by an independent person (or organisation) and a brief report provided to the icl and to the court after each session, (vii) assuming that there are no relevant issues with the mother’s time with the children according to the reports of the supervisor (set out in the previous paragraph), then the children are to spend time with the mother, for a period of six months, one overnight each alternate weekend (day and times to be agreed in writing), (viii) after that six month period, for a further period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until 4 pm sunday, (ix) after the conclusion of that period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school on the monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half school holidays. (x) it is requested the icl remain in the matter for the next 12 months and provide a note to the court every 3 months as to how matters are progressing with the children on all relevant fronts. (xi) the icl is granted liberty to relist the matter on short notice to the parties and to the court should the need to do so arise.  ) for the second month after the date of these orders, the mother may spend up to six hours with the children, one day each weekend (for a period of 4 weeks, day and times to be agreed in writing), but such time-with the mother must be supervised by an independent person (or organisation) and a brief report provided to the icl and to the court after each session, (vii) assuming that there are no relevant issues with the mother’s time with the children according to the reports of the supervisor (set out in the previous paragraph), then the children are to spend time with the mother, for a period of six months, one overnight each alternate weekend (day and times to be agreed in writing), (viii) after that six month period, for a further period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until 4 pm sunday, (ix) after the conclusion of that period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school on the monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half school holidays. (x) it is requested the icl remain in the matter for the next 12 months and provide a note to the court every 3 months as to how matters are progressing with the children on all relevant fronts. (xi) the icl is granted liberty to relist the matter on short notice to the parties and to the court should the need to do so arise.  i) assuming that there are no relevant issues with the mother’s time with the children according to the reports of the supervisor (set out in the previous paragraph), then the children are to spend time with the mother, for a period of six months, one overnight each alternate weekend (day and times to be agreed in writing), (viii) after that six month period, for a further period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until 4 pm sunday, (ix) after the conclusion of that period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school on the monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half school holidays. (x) it is requested the icl remain in the matter for the next 12 months and provide a note to the court every 3 months as to how matters are progressing with the children on all relevant fronts. (xi) the icl is granted liberty to relist the matter on short notice to the parties and to the court should the need to do so arise.  ii) after that six month period, for a further period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until 4 pm sunday, (ix) after the conclusion of that period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school on the monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half school holidays. (x) it is requested the icl remain in the matter for the next 12 months and provide a note to the court every 3 months as to how matters are progressing with the children on all relevant fronts. (xi) the icl is granted liberty to relist the matter on short notice to the parties and to the court should the need to do so arise.  ) after the conclusion of that period of 3 months the children are to spend each alternate weekend with the mother from after school friday until before school on the monday (or tuesday when a public holiday occurs), and half school holidays. (x) it is requested the icl remain in the matter for the next 12 months and provide a note to the court every 3 months as to how matters are progressing with the children on all relevant fronts. (xi) the icl is granted liberty to relist the matter on short notice to the parties and to the court should the need to do so arise.   it is requested the icl remain in the matter for the next 12 months and provide a note to the court every 3 months as to how matters are progressing with the children on all relevant fronts. (xi) the icl is granted liberty to relist the matter on short notice to the parties and to the court should the need to do so arise.  ) the icl is granted liberty to relist the matter on short notice to the parties and to the court should the need to do so arise.
associate: dated: 4 april 2023
dated: 4 april 2023
[1] transcript (31st august 2022) p.7. hereafter “t” followed by page number.[2] t 13.[3] t 29. [4] t 30.[5] t 30. [6] t 32 – 33. [7] t 33. there was further discussion about the children’s “closeness” with their mother, among other things, based upon comments from various school reports as well as in the comments from ms k’s expert report (discussed further below). as noted at the time, there was no issue at all about the closeness of the girls with their mother. see t 34 – 36. [8] t 36 – 37. [9] t 38. [10] t 39. [11] t 42. [12] t 43. [13] see t 44 & 45. there was a discussion with the father about a series of letters that were sent to the father which, he said, were sent to his address with a view to exerting some pressure on him to resolve the property proceedings between the parties. in my view it is unnecessary for me to canvass matters relating to these letters. see t 46 – 47. likewise, in my view it is unnecessary to canvass issues in relation to the sending of certain party invitations. see t 48 – 49. see further the discussion at t 101 and the references there to paragraph 62 of the father’s affidavit regarding the allegations made by the mother in late september 2019. [14] t 49. ms l filed an affidavit in these proceedings on behalf of the mother. [15] t 51. [16] t 51 – 52. [17] t 59. [18] t 61. [19] t 61 – 64. [20] t 71. [21] see generally t 74 – 80. [22] t 81 – 82. [23] see t 82. [24] t 84 – 85. [25] t 85. [26] t 86 – 87. [27] t 87.[28] t 88. [29] t 89. [30] t 90. [31] generally, see t 91 – 92.[32] t 92. [33] t 95. [34] t 96. [35] t 96 – 97 & 98. [36] t 102. [37] t 102 – 103. [38] t 105. [39] t 107. [40] t 108. [41] t 109. [42] t110.[43] t111. [44] t112. [45] t112. [46] t 116.[47] t116 – 117. [48] t 120.[49] t 120 – 121.[50] t 122.[51] t 122 – 123.[52] t 123 – 124.[53] t 126.[54] t 127.[55] t 128.[56] t 130 – 133.[57] there were no questions at any stage whether the father was said to be sexually aroused either in the shower or in any of the other alleged circumstances.[58] t 133 – 134. there was further discussion with the mother about what was in, and what was not in, her affidavit at t 135 – 136.[59] t 136.[60] t 137 – 138.[61] t 139.[62] t 139 – 142.[63] t 142 – 144 & 145 – 147.[64] this account starts on t 147.[65] t 148, 150 & 151.[66] t 151.[67] generally, see the discussion at t 154 – 156.[68] t 157 & 158.[69] t 158.[70] t 159.[71] t 159 & 160.[72] t 160 – 162.[73] t 163, 164 – 165.[74] see t 175 & 176.[75] t 178.[76] t 181 – 182.[77] t 183.[78] see t 184 & 185.[79] t 186.[80] t 188 – 189.[81] see t 189 – 193.[82] t 193.[83] t 194 & 195.[84] t 197. [85] t 198.[86] t 200 – 201.[87] t 202 & 203.[88] t 203.[89] t 204.[90] t 206.[91] t 207. [92] t 208.[93] t 208 & 209.[94] this part of the mother’s cross examination begins at t 211 where the account from the mother’s affidavit is also set out.[95] t 213.[96] t 214.[97] t 215.[98] among many places, see t 214 & 218, the latter also dealing with another intimate “inspection” of y.[99] t 217. annexure a [image removed] to these reasons is a photograph of the doll, taken next to rulers, which clearly show the dimensions of the doll as 90mm in height (or length), the width of the “very sharp end” of the doll, from “tail to tail” so to speak, is approximately 40mm. the doll is item 11 of the joint tender bundle.[100] all of these matters were canvassed in some detail between t 218 – 225. in relation to the last matter concerning the father’s multiple contact with the mother seeking information, she conceded that it was plausible that he was simply seeking information and wanting to talk to his daughter. [101] t 227.[102] t 228.[103] t 228 – 230.[104] see t 231 & 232.[105] t 233 & 234.[106] t 234 – 235.[107] t 235 – 236.[108] t 236 & 237.[109] t 237 & 238. [110] t 239 – 240. [111] t 243.[112] t 244.[113] t 245. in the transcript here there is reference to relevant pages of the icl’s tender bundle in relation to the doctor and the further interview with cyps with the child. [114] t 245.[115] t 248 & 249. there was a reasonably extensive collection of emails generally referred to the icls tender bundle regarding correspondence between the mother and the trauma counsellor. see t 249 – 253.[116] t 254.[117] t 257.[118] t 257.[119] t 258.[120] t 259 & 260.[121] t 260 – 261. i need not canvass a range of other matters discussed with the mother such as her contact with the school, and the father receiving school reports about the children. see t 260 – 262.[122] t 263.[123] t 286.[124] t 288 & 289.[125] t 293.[126] t 293.[127] t 295.[128]t 316 – 327.[129] t 306.[130] t 300.[131] isles & nelissen [2022] fedcfamc1a 97, (2022) 65 fam lr 288. see also the more recent full court discussion in pilot & silver (no.2) [2022] fedcfamc1f 538.[132] ams v aif (1999) 199 clr 160 at p.228 [204] & [205]. of course, the comments by hayne j was in a legislative context different to that which operates today. accepting that qualification, respectfully, their honour’s comments remain important.[133] b & b [2006] famca 1207 at [1]. warnick j was sitting as the full court, pursuant to s.94aaa of the act.[134] fox v percy (2003) 214 clr 118 at pp.125-126 [23]. see also the extensive discussion by mchugh j in the same case at [65] – [93].[135] franklyn & franklyn (2021) flc 94-031.[136] u v u [2002] hca 36, (2002) 211 clr 238 at 283 [164]. [137] [2007] famca 520, (2007) 37 fam lr 518 at [3] – [6]. brown j’s comments were endorsed by boland j (with whom may & o’reilly jj agreed) in moose & moose (2008) flc 93-375 at [67] – [68].[138] brown j’s remarks in this regard were endorsed by the full court in moose & moose (2008) flc 93-375 at [69], and even more recently by a differently constituted full court in mccall & clark [2009] famcafc 92, (2009) 41 fam lr 483 at [115] & [121]. the full court in collu & rinaldo [2010] famcafc 53 at [335], similarly endorsed brown j’s remarks, as did the full court in vontek v vontek [2017] famcafc 28 at [26].[139] m v m (1988) 166 clr 69.
[1]38 “vaginal opening measurement in prepubertal girls” c.w. goff, k.r. burke, c. rickenback, d.p. buebendorf, american journal of diseases of children (1989) november 143(11) 1366 – 8: abstract:
normative, age-indexed data regarding the size of the vaginal opening in prepubertal girls have not been previously reported, to our knowledge. measurement of the apparent transverse diameter of the vaginal opening was done in 273 prepubertal girls as part of their routine health assessment. vaginal opening diameter tended to enlarge with age and to be larger in the supine knee-chest position than in the supine frog-leg position. an opening greater than 4 mm was distinctly rare. with the consent of the parties, relevant information from medical literature was proposed as objective criteria regarding the physiological characteristics of young girls relevant to the current matter. the abstract above, citation, and relevant link to the national institutes of health “med line” site were provided to the parties with the opportunity for them to comment. all chose not to comment.