last updated: 31 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
stenhouse & stenhouse [2023] fedcfamc2f 446
orders
the court orders that:
in the event the father does not move to melbourne  during the school term once a month on a saturday and a sunday between the hours of 12.00 pm to 4.00 pm, (b) during the short school holidays, for each of the first five (5) days of the short school holidays between the hours of 12.00 pm to 4.00 pm, and (c) during the christmas school holidays, on at least two (2) occasions for five (5) consecutive days between the hours of 8.00 am and 4.00 pm. (d) during this six (6) month period, the mother will supply the father with food and drinks for the children and the father will not allow the children to drink or consume any food or drink not provided for by the mother.   during the short school holidays, for each of the first five (5) days of the short school holidays between the hours of 12.00 pm to 4.00 pm, and (c) during the christmas school holidays, on at least two (2) occasions for five (5) consecutive days between the hours of 8.00 am and 4.00 pm. (d) during this six (6) month period, the mother will supply the father with food and drinks for the children and the father will not allow the children to drink or consume any food or drink not provided for by the mother.   during the christmas school holidays, on at least two (2) occasions for five (5) consecutive days between the hours of 8.00 am and 4.00 pm. (d) during this six (6) month period, the mother will supply the father with food and drinks for the children and the father will not allow the children to drink or consume any food or drink not provided for by the mother.   during this six (6) month period, the mother will supply the father with food and drinks for the children and the father will not allow the children to drink or consume any food or drink not provided for by the mother.   during school terms, once a month on a saturday and a sunday from 8.00 am to 4.00 pm, (b) for the first five (5) days of the short school holidays between the hours of 8.00 am and 4.00 pm, (c) during the christmas school holidays, on at least two (2) occasions for five (5)consecutive days between the hours of 8.00 am to 4.00 pm,   for the first five (5) days of the short school holidays between the hours of 8.00 am and 4.00 pm, (c) during the christmas school holidays, on at least two (2) occasions for five (5)consecutive days between the hours of 8.00 am to 4.00 pm,   during the christmas school holidays, on at least two (2) occasions for five (5)consecutive days between the hours of 8.00 am to 4.00 pm,   once a month during the school term from saturday at 8.00 am to sunday at 4.00 pm (an overnight), with the father to inform the mother where the children will be staying, and with this order to apply for each occasion the father has overnight time with the children if such time is not at his residence. (b) during the short school holidays, for the first five (5) days of the short school holidays which period shall include two (2) overnights and with the balance of the days being from 8.00 am to 4.00 pm, (c) during the christmas school holidays, on at least two (2) occasions for five (5) consecutive days which period shall include two (2) overnights and with the balance of the days being from 8.00 am to 4.00 pm,   during the short school holidays, for the first five (5) days of the short school holidays which period shall include two (2) overnights and with the balance of the days being from 8.00 am to 4.00 pm, (c) during the christmas school holidays, on at least two (2) occasions for five (5) consecutive days which period shall include two (2) overnights and with the balance of the days being from 8.00 am to 4.00 pm,   during the christmas school holidays, on at least two (2) occasions for five (5) consecutive days which period shall include two (2) overnights and with the balance of the days being from 8.00 am to 4.00 pm,   once a month during the school term from friday at 3.00 pm to sunday at 4.00 pm, (b) during the short school holidays, for the first five (5) days of the short school holidays which period shall include four (4) overnights with the children being returned to the mother at 4.00 pm on the fifth day, (c) during the christmas school holidays, on at least two (2) occasions for five (5) consecutive days which period shall include four (4) overnights with the children being returned to the mother at 4.00 pm on the fifth day.   during the short school holidays, for the first five (5) days of the short school holidays which period shall include four (4) overnights with the children being returned to the mother at 4.00 pm on the fifth day, (c) during the christmas school holidays, on at least two (2) occasions for five (5) consecutive days which period shall include four (4) overnights with the children being returned to the mother at 4.00 pm on the fifth day.   during the christmas school holidays, on at least two (2) occasions for five (5) consecutive days which period shall include four (4) overnights with the children being returned to the mother at 4.00 pm on the fifth day.   once a month during the school term from friday at 3.00 pm to sunday at 4.00 pm, (b) during the short school holidays, for the first week, (c) during the christmas school holidays prior to the youngest child commencing grade 1, for a two (2) week block, (d) during the christmas school holidays, after the youngest child commences grade 1 the children will spend time with the father for the first half of the holidays in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years.   during the short school holidays, for the first week, (c) during the christmas school holidays prior to the youngest child commencing grade 1, for a two (2) week block, (d) during the christmas school holidays, after the youngest child commences grade 1 the children will spend time with the father for the first half of the holidays in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years.   during the christmas school holidays prior to the youngest child commencing grade 1, for a two (2) week block, (d) during the christmas school holidays, after the youngest child commences grade 1 the children will spend time with the father for the first half of the holidays in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years.   during the christmas school holidays, after the youngest child commences grade 1 the children will spend time with the father for the first half of the holidays in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years.
in the event the father relocates to melbourne.
other orders that apply regardless of where the father lives  denigrating the other parent or members of their family to or in the presence or hearing of the children and each parent shall use their best endeavours to ensure that no third party denigrates the other parent or members of their family to or in the presence or hearing of the children and are to forthwith remove the children from the presence of any person doing so, (b) using any form of corporal punishment upon the children and must not permit any other person to do likewise, (c) from consuming any illicit substances or alcohol in excess of the legal driving limit whilst the children are in their care, and (d) exposing the children to domestic violence or any criminal behaviour.   using any form of corporal punishment upon the children and must not permit any other person to do likewise, (c) from consuming any illicit substances or alcohol in excess of the legal driving limit whilst the children are in their care, and (d) exposing the children to domestic violence or any criminal behaviour.   from consuming any illicit substances or alcohol in excess of the legal driving limit whilst the children are in their care, and (d) exposing the children to domestic violence or any criminal behaviour.   exposing the children to domestic violence or any criminal behaviour.
passport and international travel   written notice of intention to travel at least thirty (30) days prior to the intended date of travel, (b) a copy of the confirmed flight tickets showing dates and times of departure and return, (c) suitable arrangements for health and travel insurance for the children, and (d) contact details for communication with the children including a phone number and address for each place the children will be staying.   a copy of the confirmed flight tickets showing dates and times of departure and return, (c) suitable arrangements for health and travel insurance for the children, and (d) contact details for communication with the children including a phone number and address for each place the children will be staying.   suitable arrangements for health and travel insurance for the children, and (d) contact details for communication with the children including a phone number and address for each place the children will be staying.   contact details for communication with the children including a phone number and address for each place the children will be staying.   school holiday periods only, and (b) for a maximum of 14 consecutive nights, and (c) on one occasion in any calendar year, and (d) to countries (including transit countries where overnight stay and clearance through immigration and customs control is required) who are signatories to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction, and (e) to countries where the australian government department of foreign affairs and trade has not issued a level 3 ‘reconsider your need to travel’ or level 4 ‘do not travel’ advice.   for a maximum of 14 consecutive nights, and (c) on one occasion in any calendar year, and (d) to countries (including transit countries where overnight stay and clearance through immigration and customs control is required) who are signatories to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction, and (e) to countries where the australian government department of foreign affairs and trade has not issued a level 3 ‘reconsider your need to travel’ or level 4 ‘do not travel’ advice.   on one occasion in any calendar year, and (d) to countries (including transit countries where overnight stay and clearance through immigration and customs control is required) who are signatories to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction, and (e) to countries where the australian government department of foreign affairs and trade has not issued a level 3 ‘reconsider your need to travel’ or level 4 ‘do not travel’ advice.   to countries (including transit countries where overnight stay and clearance through immigration and customs control is required) who are signatories to the hague convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction, and (e) to countries where the australian government department of foreign affairs and trade has not issued a level 3 ‘reconsider your need to travel’ or level 4 ‘do not travel’ advice.   to countries where the australian government department of foreign affairs and trade has not issued a level 3 ‘reconsider your need to travel’ or level 4 ‘do not travel’ advice.
procedural orders
reasons for judgmentjudge cope
current living arrangements
the children’s health issues  dr c - treating paediatrician for both children, (b) dr g - occupational therapist for both children, (c) ms h - physiotherapist for both children, (d) ms j - x’s behavioural therapist, (e) mr k – y’s exercise physiologist, (f) ms l - x’s psychologist, (g) dr m - y’s paediatric allergist/immunologist, and (h) ms n - paediatric dietitian for both children.   dr g - occupational therapist for both children, (c) ms h - physiotherapist for both children, (d) ms j - x’s behavioural therapist, (e) mr k – y’s exercise physiologist, (f) ms l - x’s psychologist, (g) dr m - y’s paediatric allergist/immunologist, and (h) ms n - paediatric dietitian for both children.   ms h - physiotherapist for both children, (d) ms j - x’s behavioural therapist, (e) mr k – y’s exercise physiologist, (f) ms l - x’s psychologist, (g) dr m - y’s paediatric allergist/immunologist, and (h) ms n - paediatric dietitian for both children.   ms j - x’s behavioural therapist, (e) mr k – y’s exercise physiologist, (f) ms l - x’s psychologist, (g) dr m - y’s paediatric allergist/immunologist, and (h) ms n - paediatric dietitian for both children.   mr k – y’s exercise physiologist, (f) ms l - x’s psychologist, (g) dr m - y’s paediatric allergist/immunologist, and (h) ms n - paediatric dietitian for both children.   ms l - x’s psychologist, (g) dr m - y’s paediatric allergist/immunologist, and (h) ms n - paediatric dietitian for both children.   dr m - y’s paediatric allergist/immunologist, and (h) ms n - paediatric dietitian for both children.   ms n - paediatric dietitian for both children.
competing proposals in summary
the father’s proposal
the mother’s proposal
the independent children’s lawyer (icl)
the issues for determination  the living arrangements for the children, including consideration of whether the children live in city b or melbourne, and (b) whether there should be orders for equal shared parental responsibility or sole parental responsibility to the mother.   whether there should be orders for equal shared parental responsibility or sole parental responsibility to the mother.   did one or both of the parties commit acts of family violence, (b) does the mother in effect “over service” the children’s medical needs, (c) does the mother exclude the father from medical matters and/or has the father failed to inform himself about medical matters, (d) does the father minimise the children’s medical needs, (e) if she remains the primary carer, is the mother capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with the father, (f) is the father capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with the mother, (g) can the children’s medical needs be adequately met in city b, (h) what would be the impact on the children of moving back to city b and changing service providers.   does the mother in effect “over service” the children’s medical needs, (c) does the mother exclude the father from medical matters and/or has the father failed to inform himself about medical matters, (d) does the father minimise the children’s medical needs, (e) if she remains the primary carer, is the mother capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with the father, (f) is the father capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with the mother, (g) can the children’s medical needs be adequately met in city b, (h) what would be the impact on the children of moving back to city b and changing service providers.   does the mother exclude the father from medical matters and/or has the father failed to inform himself about medical matters, (d) does the father minimise the children’s medical needs, (e) if she remains the primary carer, is the mother capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with the father, (f) is the father capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with the mother, (g) can the children’s medical needs be adequately met in city b, (h) what would be the impact on the children of moving back to city b and changing service providers.   does the father minimise the children’s medical needs, (e) if she remains the primary carer, is the mother capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with the father, (f) is the father capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with the mother, (g) can the children’s medical needs be adequately met in city b, (h) what would be the impact on the children of moving back to city b and changing service providers.   if she remains the primary carer, is the mother capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with the father, (f) is the father capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with the mother, (g) can the children’s medical needs be adequately met in city b, (h) what would be the impact on the children of moving back to city b and changing service providers.   is the father capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with the mother, (g) can the children’s medical needs be adequately met in city b, (h) what would be the impact on the children of moving back to city b and changing service providers.   can the children’s medical needs be adequately met in city b, (h) what would be the impact on the children of moving back to city b and changing service providers.   what would be the impact on the children of moving back to city b and changing service providers.
the evidence
the witnesses
the father  his insistence that he had not perpetrated family violence. this was despite conceding that the counselling records reflected that sessions were focused on that, including working towards gaining insight as to the impact of his conduct on the mother. (b) his proposal as recently as november 2022 for an equal time arrangement to commence forthwith even though his own evidence was that it was not achievable at this time. (c) the father apologised if the mother felt that she had been forced into having sex, and he apologised if she saw the way he spoke to her at times as family violence. he nonetheless, maintained his position that it was not family violence, and so the apology was meaningless. (d) despite the counselling with ms q and mr r, he does not seem to understand that, regardless of his intentions, verbal abuse and belittling the mother amounts to family violence. the name-calling, which he concedes, could not be perceived other than as demeaning and belittling. these were not one off occurrences. there are repeated events over years, based upon the notes taken by ms q and the father’s own concessions. it falls well within the definition of family violence. (e) when exploring why he had told people that the mother had munchausen’s by proxy, he agreed there was no such diagnosis, but said it was “one of his thoughts” and not meant to be hurtful or abusive. i find that it is an incredibly hurtful and abusive thing to say – particularly to a parent of two high needs children with multiple diagnoses. (f) his insistence that his calls with the boys must be for precisely 30 minutes. where you are dealing with a six year old and a three year old, the fact that the average time is close to 30 minutes is impressive but he could not see that. (g) his laughter and expressed view that the mother asking him to mow the lawn contraindicated family violence.   his proposal as recently as november 2022 for an equal time arrangement to commence forthwith even though his own evidence was that it was not achievable at this time. (c) the father apologised if the mother felt that she had been forced into having sex, and he apologised if she saw the way he spoke to her at times as family violence. he nonetheless, maintained his position that it was not family violence, and so the apology was meaningless. (d) despite the counselling with ms q and mr r, he does not seem to understand that, regardless of his intentions, verbal abuse and belittling the mother amounts to family violence. the name-calling, which he concedes, could not be perceived other than as demeaning and belittling. these were not one off occurrences. there are repeated events over years, based upon the notes taken by ms q and the father’s own concessions. it falls well within the definition of family violence. (e) when exploring why he had told people that the mother had munchausen’s by proxy, he agreed there was no such diagnosis, but said it was “one of his thoughts” and not meant to be hurtful or abusive. i find that it is an incredibly hurtful and abusive thing to say – particularly to a parent of two high needs children with multiple diagnoses. (f) his insistence that his calls with the boys must be for precisely 30 minutes. where you are dealing with a six year old and a three year old, the fact that the average time is close to 30 minutes is impressive but he could not see that. (g) his laughter and expressed view that the mother asking him to mow the lawn contraindicated family violence.   the father apologised if the mother felt that she had been forced into having sex, and he apologised if she saw the way he spoke to her at times as family violence. he nonetheless, maintained his position that it was not family violence, and so the apology was meaningless. (d) despite the counselling with ms q and mr r, he does not seem to understand that, regardless of his intentions, verbal abuse and belittling the mother amounts to family violence. the name-calling, which he concedes, could not be perceived other than as demeaning and belittling. these were not one off occurrences. there are repeated events over years, based upon the notes taken by ms q and the father’s own concessions. it falls well within the definition of family violence. (e) when exploring why he had told people that the mother had munchausen’s by proxy, he agreed there was no such diagnosis, but said it was “one of his thoughts” and not meant to be hurtful or abusive. i find that it is an incredibly hurtful and abusive thing to say – particularly to a parent of two high needs children with multiple diagnoses. (f) his insistence that his calls with the boys must be for precisely 30 minutes. where you are dealing with a six year old and a three year old, the fact that the average time is close to 30 minutes is impressive but he could not see that. (g) his laughter and expressed view that the mother asking him to mow the lawn contraindicated family violence.   despite the counselling with ms q and mr r, he does not seem to understand that, regardless of his intentions, verbal abuse and belittling the mother amounts to family violence. the name-calling, which he concedes, could not be perceived other than as demeaning and belittling. these were not one off occurrences. there are repeated events over years, based upon the notes taken by ms q and the father’s own concessions. it falls well within the definition of family violence. (e) when exploring why he had told people that the mother had munchausen’s by proxy, he agreed there was no such diagnosis, but said it was “one of his thoughts” and not meant to be hurtful or abusive. i find that it is an incredibly hurtful and abusive thing to say – particularly to a parent of two high needs children with multiple diagnoses. (f) his insistence that his calls with the boys must be for precisely 30 minutes. where you are dealing with a six year old and a three year old, the fact that the average time is close to 30 minutes is impressive but he could not see that. (g) his laughter and expressed view that the mother asking him to mow the lawn contraindicated family violence.   when exploring why he had told people that the mother had munchausen’s by proxy, he agreed there was no such diagnosis, but said it was “one of his thoughts” and not meant to be hurtful or abusive. i find that it is an incredibly hurtful and abusive thing to say – particularly to a parent of two high needs children with multiple diagnoses. (f) his insistence that his calls with the boys must be for precisely 30 minutes. where you are dealing with a six year old and a three year old, the fact that the average time is close to 30 minutes is impressive but he could not see that. (g) his laughter and expressed view that the mother asking him to mow the lawn contraindicated family violence.   his insistence that his calls with the boys must be for precisely 30 minutes. where you are dealing with a six year old and a three year old, the fact that the average time is close to 30 minutes is impressive but he could not see that. (g) his laughter and expressed view that the mother asking him to mow the lawn contraindicated family violence.   his laughter and expressed view that the mother asking him to mow the lawn contraindicated family violence.
the mother  that she smacked x on one occasion, (b) that she yelled at the father on two occasions in the presence of the children, (c) that she was very unwell with postnatal depression after x’s birth, (d) that at times she struggled to manage x’s behaviours, (e) that the marriage had ups as well as downs, (f) that she has shouted at x, (g) that she had discussed these proceedings with the children, but gave evidence that this was no more than was absolutely necessary, giving an example of the father insisting on discussing overnight arrangements in the presence of the children on one occasion.   that she yelled at the father on two occasions in the presence of the children, (c) that she was very unwell with postnatal depression after x’s birth, (d) that at times she struggled to manage x’s behaviours, (e) that the marriage had ups as well as downs, (f) that she has shouted at x, (g) that she had discussed these proceedings with the children, but gave evidence that this was no more than was absolutely necessary, giving an example of the father insisting on discussing overnight arrangements in the presence of the children on one occasion.   that she was very unwell with postnatal depression after x’s birth, (d) that at times she struggled to manage x’s behaviours, (e) that the marriage had ups as well as downs, (f) that she has shouted at x, (g) that she had discussed these proceedings with the children, but gave evidence that this was no more than was absolutely necessary, giving an example of the father insisting on discussing overnight arrangements in the presence of the children on one occasion.   that at times she struggled to manage x’s behaviours, (e) that the marriage had ups as well as downs, (f) that she has shouted at x, (g) that she had discussed these proceedings with the children, but gave evidence that this was no more than was absolutely necessary, giving an example of the father insisting on discussing overnight arrangements in the presence of the children on one occasion.   that the marriage had ups as well as downs, (f) that she has shouted at x, (g) that she had discussed these proceedings with the children, but gave evidence that this was no more than was absolutely necessary, giving an example of the father insisting on discussing overnight arrangements in the presence of the children on one occasion.   that she has shouted at x, (g) that she had discussed these proceedings with the children, but gave evidence that this was no more than was absolutely necessary, giving an example of the father insisting on discussing overnight arrangements in the presence of the children on one occasion.   that she had discussed these proceedings with the children, but gave evidence that this was no more than was absolutely necessary, giving an example of the father insisting on discussing overnight arrangements in the presence of the children on one occasion.
ms u - family report writer
the medical evidence
findings as to matters in dispute
was it agreed that the mother and children would remain in melbourne for only 2 – 3 weeks
did one or both of the parties commit acts of family violence
corporal punishment
does the mother in effect “over service” the children’s medical needs
does the mother exclude the father from medical and other matters and/or has the father failed to inform himself about medical matters
does the father minimise the children’s medical needs
if she remains the primary carer, is the mother capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with their father  providing to the father the names and contact details of the children’s treating therapists, (b) rectifying the case where she had not placed him as next of kin on medical advice, (c) creating access to a family album, (d) facilitating the boys passing craft and paintings to the father, (e) facilitating the boys providing gifts to the father, (f) facilitating phone communication three or four times each week, and for an average of 28 minutes on each occasion.   rectifying the case where she had not placed him as next of kin on medical advice, (c) creating access to a family album, (d) facilitating the boys passing craft and paintings to the father, (e) facilitating the boys providing gifts to the father, (f) facilitating phone communication three or four times each week, and for an average of 28 minutes on each occasion.   creating access to a family album, (d) facilitating the boys passing craft and paintings to the father, (e) facilitating the boys providing gifts to the father, (f) facilitating phone communication three or four times each week, and for an average of 28 minutes on each occasion.   facilitating the boys passing craft and paintings to the father, (e) facilitating the boys providing gifts to the father, (f) facilitating phone communication three or four times each week, and for an average of 28 minutes on each occasion.   facilitating the boys providing gifts to the father, (f) facilitating phone communication three or four times each week, and for an average of 28 minutes on each occasion.   facilitating phone communication three or four times each week, and for an average of 28 minutes on each occasion.
is the father capable of facilitating the children’s relationship with their mother
can the children’s medical needs be adequately met in city b
what would be the impact on the children of moving back to city b and changing service providers
the father’s level of insight
the law
when dealing with a case concerning the future living arrangements for a child, and involving a significant change in the geographical place where the child is to live, the preferred approach according to established principle has been not to deal with that change, or relocation, as a separate or discrete issue, but rather as just one of the proposals for the child’s future living arrangements, at least in so far as that approach is possible: see u v u (2002) 211 clr 238, 191 alr 289, 29 fam lr 74, (2002) flc 93-112, [2002] hca 36 and bolitho v cohen (2005) 33 fam lr 471, (2005) flc 93-224, [2005] famca 458.
application of the law to this matter
s 60cc(2) the primary considerations:
the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents, and the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
s 60cc(3) the additional considerations:
s 60cc(3)(a) any views expressed by the child and any factors that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views
s 60cc(3)(b) the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents and other persons.
s 60cc(3)(c) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major, long term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child.
s 60cc(3)(ca) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child.
s 60cc(3)(d) the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents.
s 60cc(3)(e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent.
s 60cc(3)(f) the capacity of each of the child’s parents to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs.
s 60cc(3)(g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant.
s 60cc(3)(i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child’s parents.
s 60cc(3)(j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child’s family and s 60cc(3)(k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order
s 60cc(3)(l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child.
s.60cc(3)(m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.  the father is a perpetrator of family violence, (b) the mother is not a perpetrator of family violence, (c) the mother does not over-service the children but rather works hard to meet their complex needs, (d) the mother has on rare occasions excluded the father from medical matters due to the family violence but has rectified that and no longer does so, (e) the father struggles to accept the children’s special needs placing a high value on being “normal”, (f) the mother will struggle to facilitate the children’s relationship with the father due to the family violence but has demonstrated that she can do so and i am satisfied that she will comply with orders, (g) the father will struggle not to continue denigrating the mother and thus there is a risk that he will be unable to facilitate and encourage the boys’ relationship with her, (h) the boys medical and allied health needs could be adequately met in city b, (i) the boys will struggle with a move to city b because of their diagnoses and special needs, particularly noting that it will be against the wish of the primary carer and noting that x is resistant to change, (j) the father is lacking in insight.   the mother is not a perpetrator of family violence, (c) the mother does not over-service the children but rather works hard to meet their complex needs, (d) the mother has on rare occasions excluded the father from medical matters due to the family violence but has rectified that and no longer does so, (e) the father struggles to accept the children’s special needs placing a high value on being “normal”, (f) the mother will struggle to facilitate the children’s relationship with the father due to the family violence but has demonstrated that she can do so and i am satisfied that she will comply with orders, (g) the father will struggle not to continue denigrating the mother and thus there is a risk that he will be unable to facilitate and encourage the boys’ relationship with her, (h) the boys medical and allied health needs could be adequately met in city b, (i) the boys will struggle with a move to city b because of their diagnoses and special needs, particularly noting that it will be against the wish of the primary carer and noting that x is resistant to change, (j) the father is lacking in insight.   the mother does not over-service the children but rather works hard to meet their complex needs, (d) the mother has on rare occasions excluded the father from medical matters due to the family violence but has rectified that and no longer does so, (e) the father struggles to accept the children’s special needs placing a high value on being “normal”, (f) the mother will struggle to facilitate the children’s relationship with the father due to the family violence but has demonstrated that she can do so and i am satisfied that she will comply with orders, (g) the father will struggle not to continue denigrating the mother and thus there is a risk that he will be unable to facilitate and encourage the boys’ relationship with her, (h) the boys medical and allied health needs could be adequately met in city b, (i) the boys will struggle with a move to city b because of their diagnoses and special needs, particularly noting that it will be against the wish of the primary carer and noting that x is resistant to change, (j) the father is lacking in insight.   the mother has on rare occasions excluded the father from medical matters due to the family violence but has rectified that and no longer does so, (e) the father struggles to accept the children’s special needs placing a high value on being “normal”, (f) the mother will struggle to facilitate the children’s relationship with the father due to the family violence but has demonstrated that she can do so and i am satisfied that she will comply with orders, (g) the father will struggle not to continue denigrating the mother and thus there is a risk that he will be unable to facilitate and encourage the boys’ relationship with her, (h) the boys medical and allied health needs could be adequately met in city b, (i) the boys will struggle with a move to city b because of their diagnoses and special needs, particularly noting that it will be against the wish of the primary carer and noting that x is resistant to change, (j) the father is lacking in insight.   the father struggles to accept the children’s special needs placing a high value on being “normal”, (f) the mother will struggle to facilitate the children’s relationship with the father due to the family violence but has demonstrated that she can do so and i am satisfied that she will comply with orders, (g) the father will struggle not to continue denigrating the mother and thus there is a risk that he will be unable to facilitate and encourage the boys’ relationship with her, (h) the boys medical and allied health needs could be adequately met in city b, (i) the boys will struggle with a move to city b because of their diagnoses and special needs, particularly noting that it will be against the wish of the primary carer and noting that x is resistant to change, (j) the father is lacking in insight.   the mother will struggle to facilitate the children’s relationship with the father due to the family violence but has demonstrated that she can do so and i am satisfied that she will comply with orders, (g) the father will struggle not to continue denigrating the mother and thus there is a risk that he will be unable to facilitate and encourage the boys’ relationship with her, (h) the boys medical and allied health needs could be adequately met in city b, (i) the boys will struggle with a move to city b because of their diagnoses and special needs, particularly noting that it will be against the wish of the primary carer and noting that x is resistant to change, (j) the father is lacking in insight.   the father will struggle not to continue denigrating the mother and thus there is a risk that he will be unable to facilitate and encourage the boys’ relationship with her, (h) the boys medical and allied health needs could be adequately met in city b, (i) the boys will struggle with a move to city b because of their diagnoses and special needs, particularly noting that it will be against the wish of the primary carer and noting that x is resistant to change, (j) the father is lacking in insight.   the boys medical and allied health needs could be adequately met in city b, (i) the boys will struggle with a move to city b because of their diagnoses and special needs, particularly noting that it will be against the wish of the primary carer and noting that x is resistant to change, (j) the father is lacking in insight.   the boys will struggle with a move to city b because of their diagnoses and special needs, particularly noting that it will be against the wish of the primary carer and noting that x is resistant to change, (j) the father is lacking in insight.   the father is lacking in insight.
determination
parental responsibility  the father’s denigration of the mother to victoria child services and ms j in october 2022, (b) the very existence of the family violence order, (c) my acceptance that the mother is fearful of the father, (d) the father’s concession that he has verbally abused the mother, and (e) the father’s refusal to accept that as family violence and his insistence that it was not meant that way.   the very existence of the family violence order, (c) my acceptance that the mother is fearful of the father, (d) the father’s concession that he has verbally abused the mother, and (e) the father’s refusal to accept that as family violence and his insistence that it was not meant that way.   my acceptance that the mother is fearful of the father, (d) the father’s concession that he has verbally abused the mother, and (e) the father’s refusal to accept that as family violence and his insistence that it was not meant that way.   the father’s concession that he has verbally abused the mother, and (e) the father’s refusal to accept that as family violence and his insistence that it was not meant that way.   the father’s refusal to accept that as family violence and his insistence that it was not meant that way.
living arrangements
international travel
changeovers
video/ phone calls
other orders
conclusion
associate: dated: 21 april 2023
dated: 21 april 2023
[1] affidavit of dr c filed 7 november 2022