last updated: 31 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
jessen & whitehouse [2023] fedcfamc2f 459
orders
the court orders that:  for the school holidays occurring at the end of terms 1, 2, and 3 – for half of each school holiday period, being the first half of such school holidays that commence in an even numbered year and the second half of such school holidays that commence in an odd numbered year, (b) for the school holidays occurring at the end of term 4 – for half of the school holiday period, with such time to be on a week-about basis unless y wishes that the time she spends be in one block equal to half of the school holiday period, and starting with the first week of such school holidays that commence in an odd numbered year and the second week of such school holidays that commence in an even numbered year.   for the school holidays occurring at the end of term 4 – for half of the school holiday period, with such time to be on a week-about basis unless y wishes that the time she spends be in one block equal to half of the school holiday period, and starting with the first week of such school holidays that commence in an odd numbered year and the second week of such school holidays that commence in an even numbered year.   with her father: (i) in odd numbered years from 4:00pm on christmas eve to 7:00pm on boxing day, (ii) in odd numbered years from 4:00pm on new year's eve to 7:00pm on new year’s day. (b) with her mother: (i) in even numbered years from 4:00pm on christmas eve to 7:00pm on boxing day, (ii) in even numbered years from 4:00pm on new year’s eve to 7:00pm on new year’s day.   in odd numbered years from 4:00pm on christmas eve to 7:00pm on boxing day, (ii) in odd numbered years from 4:00pm on new year's eve to 7:00pm on new year’s day.  ) in odd numbered years from 4:00pm on new year's eve to 7:00pm on new year’s day.   with her mother: (i) in even numbered years from 4:00pm on christmas eve to 7:00pm on boxing day, (ii) in even numbered years from 4:00pm on new year’s eve to 7:00pm on new year’s day.   in even numbered years from 4:00pm on christmas eve to 7:00pm on boxing day, (ii) in even numbered years from 4:00pm on new year’s eve to 7:00pm on new year’s day.  ) in even numbered years from 4:00pm on new year’s eve to 7:00pm on new year’s day.   with her father, (i) in even numbered years from 10:00am on good friday until 7:00pm on easter saturday, (ii) in odd numbered years from 7:00pm on easter saturday until 10:00am on easter monday. (b) with her mother: (i) in odd numbered years from 10:00am on good friday until 7:00pm on easter saturday, (ii) in even numbered years from 7:00pm on easter saturday until 10:00am on easter monday.   in even numbered years from 10:00am on good friday until 7:00pm on easter saturday, (ii) in odd numbered years from 7:00pm on easter saturday until 10:00am on easter monday.  ) in odd numbered years from 7:00pm on easter saturday until 10:00am on easter monday.   with her mother: (i) in odd numbered years from 10:00am on good friday until 7:00pm on easter saturday, (ii) in even numbered years from 7:00pm on easter saturday until 10:00am on easter monday.   in odd numbered years from 10:00am on good friday until 7:00pm on easter saturday, (ii) in even numbered years from 7:00pm on easter saturday until 10:00am on easter monday.  ) in even numbered years from 7:00pm on easter saturday until 10:00am on easter monday.   if occurring at the conclusion of y’s school attendance, the school at which y attends from time to time, or (b) by y travelling by public transport, or, if neither 9(a) nor 9(b) are applicable, (c) from the residence of the parent out of whose care y is travelling.   by y travelling by public transport, or, if neither 9(a) nor 9(b) are applicable, (c) from the residence of the parent out of whose care y is travelling.   from the residence of the parent out of whose care y is travelling.   they provide at least 60 days’ notice of the intended travel to the other parent, (b) they provide confirmation that the intended travel location is a country with a level l “exercise normal precautions” travel advice/rating issues by the department of foreign affairs and trade (or comparable rating issued by the australian government from time to time), (c) the other party consents to the intended travel within 7 days of being notified, prior to any booking being made, with that consent not to be unreasonably withheld, (d) at least 14 days prior to the proposed travel, the travelling parent provide to the other any contact number for the child during the travel period, if different to their usual contact number, a full itinerary, flight numbers, accommodation details and a copy of the travel insurance policy for the child. (e) the non-travelling parent shall have at least two scheduled telephone calls between them and y each week of travel while y is traveling.   they provide confirmation that the intended travel location is a country with a level l “exercise normal precautions” travel advice/rating issues by the department of foreign affairs and trade (or comparable rating issued by the australian government from time to time), (c) the other party consents to the intended travel within 7 days of being notified, prior to any booking being made, with that consent not to be unreasonably withheld, (d) at least 14 days prior to the proposed travel, the travelling parent provide to the other any contact number for the child during the travel period, if different to their usual contact number, a full itinerary, flight numbers, accommodation details and a copy of the travel insurance policy for the child. (e) the non-travelling parent shall have at least two scheduled telephone calls between them and y each week of travel while y is traveling.   the other party consents to the intended travel within 7 days of being notified, prior to any booking being made, with that consent not to be unreasonably withheld, (d) at least 14 days prior to the proposed travel, the travelling parent provide to the other any contact number for the child during the travel period, if different to their usual contact number, a full itinerary, flight numbers, accommodation details and a copy of the travel insurance policy for the child. (e) the non-travelling parent shall have at least two scheduled telephone calls between them and y each week of travel while y is traveling.   at least 14 days prior to the proposed travel, the travelling parent provide to the other any contact number for the child during the travel period, if different to their usual contact number, a full itinerary, flight numbers, accommodation details and a copy of the travel insurance policy for the child. (e) the non-travelling parent shall have at least two scheduled telephone calls between them and y each week of travel while y is traveling.   the non-travelling parent shall have at least two scheduled telephone calls between them and y each week of travel while y is traveling.   any medical problems or illnesses suffered by y while in their care, (b) any medication that has been prescribed for y, (c) any social, school or religious functions which y is to attend, (d) any medical practitioners that y has received treatment from and (e) any other matter relevant to y’s welfare.   any medication that has been prescribed for y, (c) any social, school or religious functions which y is to attend, (d) any medical practitioners that y has received treatment from and (e) any other matter relevant to y’s welfare.   any social, school or religious functions which y is to attend, (d) any medical practitioners that y has received treatment from and (e) any other matter relevant to y’s welfare.   any medical practitioners that y has received treatment from and (e) any other matter relevant to y’s welfare.   any other matter relevant to y’s welfare.
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
introduction
the materials relied upon at hearing
the competing proposals of the parties and the independent child’s lawyers
parental responsibility the mother and the father have equal shared parental responsibility for [x] ("[x]") born [in] 2005 and [y] ("[y]") born [in] 2007 in relation to their long term care, welfare and development. the parties be at liberty to make any day to day decisions in relation to the health and medical needs of the children whilst the children are in their care, and will advise the other party of any relevant issues within 24 hours of such issue occurring, except in relation to emergencies which require attendance of police, ambulance or hospitalisation, where either parent will notify the other immediately upon such occurrence. live with and spend time with arrangements [x] live with the mother. [y] live with the father until 20 december 2022 and thereafter to live with both parents as outlined in the orders below. [x] shall spend time with the father as agreed, and failing agreement, on each alternate weekend commencing week one from friday at 3:00pm to sunday at 7:00pm, ensuring that on these weekends [y] also spend time with the father. [x] spend additional time with the father as agreed between the parties. from the date of these orders until 30 january 2023, [y] shall spend time with the mother as agreed, and failing agreement, on each alternate weekend commencing week two from friday at 3:00pm to sunday at 7:00pm, ensuring that on these weekends [x] also spend time with the mother. from 30 january 2023, [y] shall spend time with the parents as follows, except during school holiday periods which will be in accordance with orders below:- unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parents, [y] spend time with the parents in a week about arrangement, ·with the first week with the father from 3.00pm or after school on friday until 3:00pm on friday and the second week with the mother from 3:00pm or after school on friday until 3.00pm on friday. the week that [y] lives with the father shall fall on a week that the [ms b] children are present in the father's household and on a weekend that [x] is present in the father's household. the week that [y] lives with the mother shall fall on a week that [x] is present in the mother's household. schooling [y] shall complete year 9 at [o school] in 2022. [y] shall be enrolled to attend [p school] to commence in year 10 in january 2023, and shall commence attending that school from year 10 in january 2023 and complete her high schooling at that school, noting that [p school] is located half way between the parents' respective homes. that the mother and the father do all acts and things and sign all documents and all authorities necessary to enrol [y] in [p school] for the commencement of year 10 in january 2023 at least 60 days before the commencement of the 2023 school year. [x] shall continue to attend [q school] from the date of these orders and shall complete his high schooling at that school. each parent is permitted to liaise directly with [y]'s school, sporting bodies and/or extra-curricular organisation to obtain any necessary information about the children's progress, and these orders are authority for the school, sporting bodies and/or other organisations to release such information as requested by the other parent these orders are authority for [y]'s school to provide to both parents with copies of [y]'s school reports, newsletters, photograph order forms and invitations to attend any activities which parents are invited to attend and for both parents to be named on all school and extracurricular records as emergency contacts. each parent is permitted to attend parent-teacher interviews, concerts, camps, carnivals and other events involving [y]'s school, or in the context of extra­ curricular activities to which parents are ordinarily invited, even if that event occurs at a time when [y] is in the care of the other parent pursuant to these orders. school holiday periods during the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays each year, the time in the orders above shall be suspended and the children shall spend time with the parents as agreed in writing, or failing agreement as follows:
18.1 in week one, the children shall spend time with the father from the first saturday at 10:00am after term ends until the following saturday at 7:00pm, and 18.2 in week two, the children shall spend time with the mother from saturday at 7:00pm until the day that school resumes. during school holidays at the conclusion of term four (4) in each year, the time in the orders above shall be suspended and the children shall spend time with the parents as agreed in writing, or failing agreement as follows:
20. in each odd-numbered year:
20.1 for the first half of the school holidays with the father, and 20.2 for the second half of the school holidays with the mother,
21. in each even-numbered year:
21.1 for the first half of the school holidays with the mother, 2l.2for the second half of the school holidays with the father, and for the purpose of order 16 changeover is to occur on the saturday which falls in the middle of the school holiday period. notwithstanding any other order, unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parents: 23.1 the children shall spend time with the father:
23.1.1 in odd numbered years from 4:00 pm on christmas eve to 7:00pm on boxing day, 23.1.1 in odd numbered years from 4:00pm on new year's eve to 7:00pm on new years day.
23.2 the children shall spend time with the mother:
23.2.2 in even numbered years from 4:00 pm on christmas eve to 7:00pm on boxing day, 23.2.3 in even numbered years from 4:00pm on new year's eve to 7:00pm on new years day. notwithstanding any other order, unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parents, for the easter holiday period the children spend time with the parents as follows:-
24.1 the children shall spend time with the father:
24.1.1 in even numbered years from 10:00am on good friday until 7:00pm on easter saturday, 24.1.2 in odd numbered years from 7:00pm on easter saturday until 10:00am on easter monday.
24.2 the children shall spend time with the mother:
24.2.1 in odd numbered years from 10:00am on good friday until 7:00pm on easter saturday, 24.2.2 in even numbered years from 7:00pm on easter saturday until 10:00am on easter monday. if not specifically referred to otherwise the commencement of time on a non-school day shall be at 10:00am and the conclusion of time shal1 be at 7:00pm. in the event the father is in sydney, the parents shall communicate with one another and use their best endeavours to facilitate time between [x] and the father. in the event the mother is on the [region ag], the parents shall communicate with one another and use their best endeavours to facilitate time between [y] and the mother.
special occasions for the purposes of the following special occasions the parties' usual time with the children in accordance with the above orders is suspended and the parties shall spend time with the children as follows, for each child's birthday, the non caring parent will spend time with the child whose birthday falls on that day, and the other child together, as follows: on a non-school day, for at least four hours, and failing agreement, from 1pm to 5pm on that child's birthday, and on a school. day, for at least three hours, and failing agreement, from 3pm to 6pm on that child's birthday. in addition to the above, if either parent arranges a birthday party on a weekend falling before or after the child's birthday, the other parent shall ensure the child whose birthday it is, together with the other child, will attend the party for the period of the party, provided at least 14 days notice to the other parent is given and not overnight unless otherwise agreed. for each of the parent's birthdays, the children spend time with each parent on their birthday and, failing agreement, from 1pm to 5pm on a non-school day and from 3pm to 6pm on a school day, and
30.1 in addition to the above, if either parent arranges a birthday party on a weekend falling before or after their birthday, the other parent shall ensure the children will attend the party for the period of the party, provided at least 14 days notice to the other parent is given and not overnight unless otherwise agreed. 30.2 in addition to the above, if either parent provided at least 14 days notice to the other parent of a family event, family birthday party, or other special family occasion, as the notified parent shall ensure the children will attend the event for the period of the event and overnight if the event is interstate, unless otherwise agreed. 30.3 on father's day the children shall spend time with the father from 5pm on the saturday prior to father's day to 7pm on father's day. 30.4 on mother's day the children shall spend time with the father from 5pm on the saturday prior to mother's day to 7pm on father's day. the parties shall ensure the children attend further family events with the other party including but not limited to: 31.1 the children's milestones such as school award ceremonies or assemblies, graduations, concerts, camps and birthday parties, 31.2 visiting a family member who is ill in hospital or aged care settings, 31.3 family weddings or engagement parties, 31.4 family funerals.
changeover changeovers may occur by car or public transport and the mode of transport for each changeover shall be decided by the parent :from whose care the children are departing from. if changeover occurs by car, the parent with the children shall deliver the children to the other parent's residence at the commencement of time and the other parent shall deliver the children back to the other's residence at the conclusion of time. 34 the parent with the care of the children when they are due to travel shall:
34. 1 facilitate the children embarking on a service which disembarks at the train station nearest the other parent, and 34.2 promptly notify the other parent via text of the childrens' arrival time.
35 on arrival the other parent shall:
35.1 promptly notify the other parent via text that the children have arrived. for weekend spend time arrangements, the parents shall ensure that the children embark for travel after school on friday at the commencement of time. for weekend spend time arrangements, if public transport is being used, the parents shall ensure that the children disembarks by 7:00pm on sunday at the conclusion of time. if public transport is being used for non-school days, the parents shall ensure that the children disembark by 10:00am at the commencement of time, and the father shall ensure that the children disembarks by 7:00pm at the conclusion of time.
father's travel should the father travel interstate or overseas for work commitments, [y] and [x] shall live with the mother during that travel time. travel the parties be permitted to travel with the children during their time with the children in accordance with these orders, outside of the state of new south wales but within the commonwealth on australia on the following conditions: they provide at least 14 days of the intended travel to the other parent, at least 7 days prior to the proposed travel, the travelling parent provide to the other any contact number for the children during the travel period, if different to their usual contact number, a full itinerary, flight numbers, accommodation details and a copy of the travel insurance policy for the children. the parties agree that the non-travelling parent shall have at least 2 scheduled telephone calls between them and the children per week of travel while they are traveling. the parties be permitted to travel with the children during their time with the children in accordance with these orders, outside of the commonwealth on australia on the following conditions: 42 they provide at least 60 days' notice of the intended travel to the other parent, confirmation that the intended travel location is a country with a level l "exercise normal precautions" travel advice/rating issues by the department of foreign affairs and trade (or comparable rating issued by the australian government from time to time, the other party consent to the intended travel within 7 days of being notified, prior to any booking being made, with that consent not to be unreasonably withheld, at least 14 days prior to the proposed travel, the travelling parent provide to the other any contact number for the children during the travel period, if different to their usual contact number, a full itinerary, flight numbers, accommodation details and a copy of the travel insurance policy for the children. the parties agree that the non-travelling parent shall have at least 2 scheduled telephone calls between them and the children per week of travel while they are traveling. unless otherwise agreed the parties be at liberty to take the children on 3 interstate holidays per year and 1 overseas holiday per year. the mother shall retain possession of the children's passports. the parties do all things and sign all documents necessary to obtain and maintain passports for the children with a validity of at least 6 months, with the costs shared equally between the parties. for the purpose of international travel, the mother in possession of the children's passports deliver the passport to the father at least 14 days prior to intended departure and the father return the passports no more than 7 days after returning to australia should the passports be required for visa applications, the mother provide the children's passports to the father within 7 days of any request made by the father in writing. extra-curricular activities should either parent wish to arrange any extra-curricular activity or service, sporting activity or service, tutoring or support service, weekend, holiday or other care, or any other service, activity or event for the children, that parent will:
52.1 arrange the service, activity or event to occur within their scheduled time with the children unless otherwise agreed between the parents 52.2 facilitate all travel to and from the service, activity or event unless otherwise agreed between the parents, and 52.3 assume all related costs of the service, activity or event.
additional orders the children be at liberty to contact the non caring parent via telephone and/or face time at least each alternate night between 9 and 9:30 pm with the telephone calls to be more than 15 minutes but not to exceed 30 minutes, with the caring parent to ensure the children are both available to participate in the call and the non caring parent to initiate the call. the non caring parent shall not call the children multiple times a day when the children are not in their care. each parent shall facilitate all reasonable requests made by the other parent to communicate with the children on these special occasions:, the children's respective birthdays, either parent's birthday, mother's day, father's day, easter, christmas day, and new years. subject to the written approval of both of the parents of [mr r], [ms s] and [mr t] ("the [b] children"), x shall be able to spend overnight time with the father in the presence of the [b] children provided adequate supervision is conducted by the father and his partner [ms b] and that x is provided his own private bedroom that is not shared with any other child of the father's household and has use of a bathroom with a lock. [x] is to have his own private bedroom in each household. [y] is to have her own private bedroom in each household, or she shall only share a room with female siblings. therapy ·with therapist, [mr c], continue with the mother and [y] until such time as [mr c] advises it is appropriate to conclude the therapy sessions. the parties are to participate in family therapy with a family therapist, [dr u]. the family therapy shall commence in may, with the mother meeting ·with the family therapist alone, and then in june with the father meeting with the family therapist alone, followed in july by the children attending family therapy with the parents in a shuttle style arrangement, whereby [y] and [x] will attend a session with the mother, and then the following session will see [y] and [x] attend a session with the father. the level and extent of [x]'s involvement in family therapy will be decided in consultation between the family therapist, the parents and [x]. the parties are to participate in the family therapy for at least 12 months, or as recommended by the family therapist. [y] is to attend on paediatrician [dr e], or such other paediatrician as referred by [dr e] or [y]'s regular gp, once in each 12 month period from april 2022, or more frequently if indicated and referred by [y]'s regular gp. that the father shall, within 14 days from the date of these orders, take steps to obtain a referral to a psychologist, and attend on that medical professional to assist him in working through his feelings and attitude toward [x], and may provide a copy of the family report of [ms n] dated 4 august 2021 and a copy of these orders to assist him in obtaining the therapeutic support. within 14 days from the date of this order, the parents will attend on psychologist, [mr v] to develop a plan to manage the inconsistencies between the mother and father's households which have made [x]'s transition between the households problematic, particularly in respect to the disciplinary actions taken by the parents in the event of any troubling behaviours exhibited by either [x] or [y]. upon the development of such a plan, the parents agree to implement such a regime in their respective households. 66 both parties are restrained from: discussing these proceedings with the children, with the exception of advising the children in relation to their movements in accordance with these orders, discussing where the children should live, denigrating the other parent or the other parent's family in the presence or hearing of the children, and will use their best endeavours to ensure that no third party denigrates the other parent or other parent s family in the presence or hearing of the children, behaving in an abusive or coercive manner toward the other, or allowing any other person to do so, passing messages to the other parent through the children, discussing any issues, including contact arrangements, planned holidays or other matters requiring agreement, with the children prior to consultation with the other party as required by these orders, or allowing any other person to do so, allowing the children to have electronic devices in their bedrooms one hour before bedtime and overnight, smoking cigarettes, e-cigarettes or illicit substances or consuming alcohol to excess when the children are in their care, dictating diet restrictions, activities, conversations and any other type of parenting decisions whilst the children are in the other parent's care. each party be at liberty to provide a copy of these orders to the children's schools and all treatment providers as necessary. each party take all steps to ensure that the children attend upon their treating health practitioners ("the children's treaters"), and follow all reasonable recommendations of the children's treaters, including attending upon any sessions with the children's psychologists only if recommended by the treatment providers. each parent shall be permitted to receive and provide information to each of the children's schools, therapists, psychologist, paediatricians, medical practitioners, specialists, dentists and orthodontists, dieticians and nutritionists, family therapists and any other treatment providers, and these orders are authority for the schools, therapists, psychologist, paediatricians, medical practitioners, specialists, dentists and orthodontists, dieticians and nutritionists, family therapists and any other treatment providers to release such information as requested by the other parent. each parent shall provide the other parent with any and all information received from or in relation to the children's schools, therapists, psychologist, paediatricians, medical practitioners, specialists, dentists and orthodontists, dieticians and nutritionists, family therapists and any other treatment providers. should the children exercise medical confidentiality· over their information, but there is a risk to that child's health or safety, the any confidentiality request shall be superseded by these orders as authority for the schools, therapists, psychologist, paediatricians, medical practitioners, specialists, dentists and orthodontists, dieticians and nutritionists, family therapists and any other treatment providers to release such information as requested by the parents. the parties shall ensure that the children will have a minimum of annual dental and medical check ups claimed on the father's private health fund. if the mother pays for the children's expense claimable on the father's and children's private heath fund, the private health fund gap will reimbursed to the mother and the father shall provide evidence of the reimbursement amount to the mother from the children's health fund. any additional medical and dental expenses shall be shared between the parties, including any orthodontic or optical expenses. that the parents shall communicate regarding their children in writing by sms or email. each parent shall keep the other advised of all treating medical practitioners, including therapists, psychologists, paediatricians, medical practitioners, specialists and family therapists, including all appointment details for each treatment provider. both parties shall follow the directions of each of the children's treating medical practitioners, including therapists, psychologists, paediatricians, medical practitioners and family therapists, dentists and orthodontists and ensure the children attend on sessions and the parties attending on sessions if recommended by the provider and shall follow through on reasonable treatment recommendations. the parties shall abide by these orders in the event of covid-19 local government area lockdowns where they live, including for the purposes of changeovers, unless otherwise advised by the court in which these orders , were made. further to order 3, both parents shall by virtue of these orders be permitted to attend upon any emergency treatment provider and be able to access information, treatment plans and be consulted in relation to any treatment offered. in the event either party is unavailable to care for the children during their time due to overnight work or travel commitments, family medical emergencies or other unforeseen circumstances the other parent is to be given the first opportunity to care for the children and be given notice of same as soon as possible. in the event of any dispute as to the interpretation, implementation or enforcement of these orders, including any request to vary, the parties shall first attend family dispute resolutions (fdr) with a fdr practitioner appointed by the parties and make a genuine attempt to resolve the dispute. failing agreement as to the fdr practitioner, the party raising the dispute shall nominate 3 practitioners and the other party shall select 1 practitioner to engage within 7 days, and the costs of such process to be shared equally between the parties. each parent shall be permitted to provide a copy of the final orders in this matter and a copy of the family report of [ms n] dated 04 august 2021 and other relevant sealed documents in these proceedings to a family dispute resolution practitioner in the event that family dispute resolution is required. in the event that either child experiences any circumstance that requires attendance by police, attendance by ambulance or for the child to attend hospital. the parent with the care of the child will notify the other parent urgently by text message. in the event that either parent has any knowledge or any concern relating to the children's behaviours, whether behaviours have occurred, are alleged to have occurred, or there is a concern that that mav have occurred, that parent will:
81.1 notifv the other parent as soon as is reasonably practicable by email, providing all details. 81.2 notify the children's treating therapeutic practitioner via email providing all details and include the other parent into any correspondence.
notations the court notes that it is the parents' intention for [x] to be able to live with his father while the [b] children are in the father's household and for this purpose, from the date of these orders, the parents shall:
82.1 seek professional guidance and recommendations in writing from [x]'s treatment team including forensic psychologist [mr m], psychologist [mr v] and paediatrician professor [mr w], that [x] may spend overnight time with the [b] children_ and any guidance on that on an ongoing basis: 82.2 the father will then provide these recommendations to the parents of the [b] children on an ongoing basis: 82.3 the parents agree that [x]'s spend-time arrangements in the father's household may continue as outlined in these orders with the [b] children, and 82.4 failing agreement the parents will be guided by [x]'s wishes, with the guidance of [x]'s psychologists and treaters, and if necessary, thereafter attend family dispute resolution.
parental responsibility the mother and the father shall have equal shared parental responsibility for the children. each parent shall be responsible for the day-to-day care of the children when they are in their respective care. live with 4. [x] shall live with the mother. 5. [y] shall live with the father. spend time [x] shall spend time with the father each alternate weekend commencing week one from friday at 6:00pm to sunday at 7:00pm. [y] shall spend time with the mother each alternate weekend commencing week two from friday at 6:00pm to sunday at 7:00pm. school holidays the children shall spend time with the parents as agreed in writing or failing agreement:
8.1. the children shall spend alternate weeks with each parent by remaining in the care of the parent with whom they have spent the weekend according to the spend-time arrangement outlined in order 6, until 6pm the following friday. 8.2. such time shall commence from the first friday following the end of each school term (including a friday that is final day of term) and concludes on the final friday that falls within each school holiday period.
special occasions notwithstanding any other order unless otherwise agreed in writing between the parents, the children shall spend:
9.1. from 4:00pm on christmas eve to 7:00pm on boxing day in even years with the mother. 9.2. from 4:00pm on christmas eve to 7:00pm on boxing day in odd years with the father. 9.3. from 4:00pm on new year’s eve to 7:00pm on new year’s day in odd years with the mother. 9.4. from 4:00pm on new year’s eve to 7:00pm on new year’s day in even years with the father. each parent shall facilitate all reasonable requests made by the other parent to communicate and/or spend time with [x] and/or [y] on these special occasions: 10.1. either child’s birthday, 10.2. either parent’s birthday, 10.3. easter sunday, 10.4. mother’s day, 10.5. father’s day, 10.6. christmas, and 10.7. new year’s.
changeovers changeovers may occur by car or public transport and the mode of transport for each changeover shall be decided by the parent from whose care the child is departing from.
11.1. if changeover occurs by car, the parent from whose care the child is departing from shall facilitate travel to the residence of the other parent, arriving by the specified time. 11.2. if changeover occurs by public transport, the parent from whose care the child is departing from shall facilitate the child disembarking at the destination nearest to the other parent by the specified time. should public transport be used for changeover, the parents shall keep each other informed by text of the children’s departure and/or arrival times and each parent shall notify the other promptly by text when the child who has travelled has entered their care.
communication the parents agree to treat each other, each member of the other parent’s household and each member of the other parent’s family with respect and courtesy at all times. the parents shall keep each other informed of their contact telephone number and email address and promptly advise of any change of contact details. each parent shall be permitted to communicate with [x] at any reasonable time and shall provide [x] with privacy in any communication with the other parent. each parent shall be permitted to communicate with [y] at any reasonable time and shall provide [y] with privacy in any communication with the other parent. each parent shall facilitate any reasonable request made by [x] to communicate with the other parent or with [y]. each parent shall facilitate any reasonable request made by [y] to communicate with the other parent or with [x]. restraints each parent is restrained from denigrating the other parent, a member of the other parent’s family or a member of the other parent’s household in the presence or within hearing distance of the children. each parent is restrained from allowing the children to remain in the presence of, or remain within hearing distance of, any person denigrating the other parent, a member of the other parent’s family, or a member of the other parent’s household. each parent is restrained from discussing these proceedings with the children with the exception of advising the children in relation to their movements in accordance with these orders. each parent is restrained from asking the children to pass messages to the other parent and from making arrangements with the children outside of their ordered time which has not already been agreed between the parents. each parent shall remove the children from any situation where any person or persons present are heavily intoxicated or behaving in a way that could cause the children distress, fear or emotional, psychological or physical harm. medical and therapeutic each parent shall be responsible for the medical and therapeutic needs of the children when they are in their respective care, including any associated costs. in relation to any medically necessary major medical, dental, orthodontic, optical, surgical or diagnostic imaging costs relating to the children, the parents shall:
25.1. communicate with each other regarding their financial circumstances and ability to contribute to any associated costs, noting that it is the intention of the parents to assume the costs equally whenever possible, 25.2. in circumstances where either parent is not in a financial position to assume half of the costs, the other parent shall pay for the costs, and 25.3. in circumstances where both parents are not in a financial position to pay for the costs, the children shall receive treatment and care in the public system. each parent shall ensure that the children continue to access therapeutic support from their treating psychologist/s as needed and as recommended by those therapeutic supports. each parent is permitted to attend upon any treatment provider and be able to provide information, access information, be provided all documentation and communications and be consulted in relation to the children’s: 27.1. school, 27.2. tutors and educational supports, 27.3. sports and extra-curricular contacts, 27.4. counsellors, 27.5. therapists, 27.6. psychologists, 27.7. psychiatrists, 27.8. paediatricians, and 27.9. medical and health practitioners. each parent shall keep the other parent advised of all appointments with the above- listed services prior to any scheduled appointment and each parent shall be at liberty to attend appointments and/or events. each parent shall promptly provide the other parent with a copy of any documentation, plans and reports that they have access to regarding the children’s medical and therapeutic diagnoses and treatment by email or otherwise by hard copy. in the event that [x] or [y] experience any circumstance that requires attendance by police, attendance by ambulance or hospital attendance, the parent with the care of the child/ren involved shall notify the other parent urgently by text. in the event that [x] or [y] express or experience any of the below, the parent with the care of the child/ren will notify the other parent urgently by text and facilitate the child/ren contacting the other parent as soon as possible: 31.1. suicidal ideation, 31.2. self-harming behaviours, 31.3. any concerning depressive, anxious or other behaviours relating to psychological health or wellbeing, 31.4. any serious medical or health concerns, 31.5. any behaviours requiring attendance by a third party. each parent shall follow through with all reasonable treatment recommendations of the children’s medical and/or psychological treatment providers, including ensuring the children attend upon sessions, each of the parents attend upon sessions as recommended by the treatment providers. each parent shall be permitted to provide a copy of the family report of [ms n] dated 04 august 2021 to any of the children’s medical or therapeutic treatment providers. each parent shall be permitted to provide a copy of the final orders in this matter to the children’s schools and any of the children’s medical or therapeutic treatment providers. each parent shall be permitted to provide a copy of the final orders in this matter and a copy of the family report of [ms n] dated 04 august 2021 to a family dispute resolution practitioner in the event that family dispute resolution is required. should either parent wish to arrange any extra-curricular activity or service, sporting activity or service, tutoring or support service, weekend, holiday or other care, or any other service, activity or event for either child, that parent will: 36.1. arrange the service, activity or event to occur within their scheduled time with the child/ren unless otherwise agreed between the parents, 36.2. facilitate all travel to and from the service, activity or event unless otherwise agreed between the parents, and, 36.3. assume all related costs of the service, activity or event.
travel each parent shall be permitted to travel interstate with [x] and/or [y] during times that they are in their respective care, and outside of this by agreement in writing. if either parent proposes to travel interstate with [x] and/or [y], the parent who intends to travel shall provide at least one week’s notice to the other parent and will provide an itinerary and contact details. each parent shall be permitted to remove [x] and/or [y] from the commonwealth of australia during times that they are in their respective care, and outside of this by written agreement between the parents. if either parent proposes to remove [x] and/or [y] from the commonwealth of australia, the parent who intends to travel shall provide at least three weeks’ notice to the other parent and will provide an itinerary and contact details. the parent travelling interstate or internationally with [x] and/or [y] shall ensure that [x] and/or [y] are able to contact the other parent at all reasonable times. [x] and/or [y] may travel interstate or internationally without a parent present by written agreement between the parents. the mother shall retain [x]'s passport and birth certificate. the mother shall provide [x]'s passport to the father at least one week prior to travel, and the father shall return the passport to the mother within one week of returning. the mother shall promptly provide [x]'s birth certificate and/or passport upon request by the father for any official purpose, and the father shall promptly return them to the mother. the father shall retain [y]'s passport and birth certificate. the father shall provide [y]'s passport to the mother at least one week prior to travel, and the mother shall return the passport to the father within one week of returning. the father shall promptly provide [y]'s birth certificate and/or passport upon request by the mother for any official purpose, and the mother shall promptly return them to the father. in the event that both the father and the children’s step-mother [ms b] are unavailable to care for the children during the children’s scheduled time with the father due to overnight work or travel commitments, family emergencies or other unforeseen circumstances, the father shall give the mother the first opportunity to care for the children. in the event that the mother is unavailable to care for the children during the children’s scheduled time with the mother due to overnight work or travel commitments, family emergencies or other unforeseen circumstances, the mother shall give the father the first opportunity to care for the children. dispute resolution in the event of any disagreement as to the interpretation, implementation or enforcement of these orders or regarding any matter relating to the care of the children, the parents shall:
51.1. in the first instance, communicate and make a genuine attempt to resolve the disagreement between themselves, and 51.2. failing agreement, the parents shall attend family dispute resolution and make a genuine attempt to resolve the disagreement. if a family dispute resolution practitioner is required, the parent raising the dispute shall nominate and notify the other parent of three (3) practitioners located approximately half-way between the households or closer to the other parent’s household, and include at least (2) inexpensive or free options (such as [z centre] and [ab centre]), and the other parent shall select one (1) practitioner to engage within fourteen (14) days. any associated costs for the family dispute resolution practitioner shall be equally shared between the parties.
notations the court notes that it is the parents’ intention that the children shall attend high school in the catchment or nearby the residence of the parent with whom they live until the completion of their higher school certificate. the court notes that it is the parents’ intention that whenever possible [x] and [y] will be provided a private bedroom in each household, and will otherwise share a room with a sibling of the same gender.
spend time with orders [x] shall spend time with the father each alternate weekend commencing week one from friday at 4:00pm to sunday at 7:00pm. [y] shall spend time with the mother each alternate weekend commencing week two from friday 4:00pm to sunday at 7:00pm. school holiday time during the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holiday periods each year, the time in orders 6 and 7 shall be suspended and the children shall spend time with the parents as agreed in writing or failing agreement as follows:
8.1 in week one, the children shall spend time with the father from the first saturday at 10:00am after the term ends until 7:00pm on the following saturday, and 8.2 in week two, the children shall spend time with the mother from 10:00am saturday until 7:00pm the following sunday before school resumes. during the summer school holiday period at the end of term 4 in each year, the times in orders 6 and 7 shall be suspended and the children shall spend time with the parents commencing on the first saturday at 10:00am after the term ends as follows: 9.1 in each odd-numbered year:
9.1.1 for the first two weeks of the school holidays with the mother, 9.1.2 for the second two weeks of the school holidays with the father, and 9.1.3 for the fifth week of the school holidays with the mother, 9.1.4 for the sixth week of the school holidays with the father.
9.2 in each even-numbered year:
9.2.1 for the first two weeks of the school holidays with the father, 9.2.2 for the second two weeks of the school holidays with the mother, and 9.2.3 for the fifth week of the school holidays with the father, 9.2.4 for the sixth week of the school holidays with the mother.
9.3 changeover is to occur on the saturday which falls in the middle of the school holiday period. if not specifically referred to otherwise the commencement of time on a non- school day shall be at 10:00am and the conclusion of time shall be at 7:00pm. in the event the father is in sydney, the father shall communicate with the mother and they will each use their best endeavours to facilitate time between [x] and the father.
changeovers changeovers may occur by car or public transport and the mode of transport for each changeover shall be decided by the parent from whose care [x] is departing from. if changeover occurs by car, the mother shall deliver [x] to the father’s residence at the commencement of time and the father shall deliver [x] to the mother’s residence at the conclusion of time. if changeover occurs by public transport:
14.1 the parent with the care of [x] when he is due to travel shall:
14.1.1 facilitate [x] embarking on a service which disembarks at the train station nearest the other parent, and 14.1.2 promptly notify the other parent via text of [x]'s arrival time.
14.2 on arrival, the other parent shall promptly notify the other parent via text that [x] has arrived. if public transport is being used, the parent with the care of [x] when he is due to travel shall ensure that [x] disembarks at the destination nearest to the other parent by 10:00am at the commencement of any time and disembark by 7:00pm at the conclusion of time.
communication the parents shall keep each other informed of their contact telephone number and email address and promptly advise of any change of contact details. each parent shall be permitted to communicate with [x] at any reasonable time and the parent with whom [x] is in their respective care shall provide [x] with privacy during any communication. each parent shall facilitate any reasonable request made by [x] to communicate with the other parent or with [y]. each parent is restrained from restricting [x] access to any phone, text or email to communicate with the other parent or with [y] at any reasonable time. each parent shall facilitate all reasonable requests made by the other parent to communicate with and/or spend time with [x] on these special occasions:
20.1 [x]'s birthday, 20.2 either parent’s birthday, 20.3 mother’s day, 20.4 father’s day, 20.5 christmas day, and 20.6 new years.
restraints 21. that without admissions, each parent be restrained from:
21.1 exposing the children to violence including physical or verbal threats or intimidation, whether such threats or intimidation or violence be directed at the children, the mother, the father or any other member of either parent’s household, 21.2 physically disciplining the children, 21.3 denigrating the other or members of the other parent’s family in the presence or hearing of the children and each parent shall do all acts and things reasonably necessary to prevent any other person doing so, 21.4 conveying messages through the children and or using the children as a go-between to convey messages to each other, 21.5 discussing these proceedings or any issues arising out of these proceedings with the children or permitting any third party to do so, 21.6 making critical or derogatory remarks on any social media platform, such as facebook or twitter in relation to the other parent or referring in any way to the proceedings, 21.7 being under the influence of alcohol beyond the legal limit in the presence of the children or whilst the children are in his or her care, and 21.8 bringing the children into contact with any person under the influence of illicit drugs or excessive alcohol consumption.
communication and information that the mother and father be at liberty to receive from any school or extra- curricular organisation that [x] attends, at their own cost, any documents, information or correspondence ordinarily provided to parents, and be at liberty to attend any school or extra-curricular organisation [x] attends for the purpose of any function or event ordinarily attended by parents. that the mother and father shall be at liberty to receive from any health professional, who at any time treats [x], all documents, reports, correspondence and information ordinarily provided to parents, and attend any medical appointment ordinarily attended by parents. each parent shall ensure that [x] continues to access therapeutic support from his treating psychologist/s for as long as deemed necessary by the treating psychologist/s. each parent shall promptly provide the other parent with a copy of any documentation, information, plans and reports regarding [x]'s medical and therapeutic diagnoses and treatment by email or otherwise by hard copy. notifications in the event that [x] experiences any circumstance that requires attendance by police, attendance by ambulance or for [x] to attend hospital, the parent with the care of [x] will notify the other parent urgently by text message. in the event that [x] expresses or experiences any of the below, the parent with the care of [x] will notify the other parent urgently by text message:
27.1 suicidal ideation, 27.2 self-harming behaviours, 27.3 aggressive behaviours, 27.4 violent behaviours, 27.5 any concerning depressive, anxious or other behaviours relating to psychological health or wellbeing, and 27.6 any behaviours requiring attendance by a third party. in the event that either parent has any knowledge or any concern relating to [x]'s behaviours, whether behaviours have occurred, are alleged to have occurred, or there is a concern that they may have occurred, that parent will: 28.1 notify the other parent as soon as is reasonably practicable by email, providing all details. 28.2 notify [x]'s treating therapeutic practitioner via email, providing all details and include the other parent into any correspondence.
therapeutic supports each parent shall follow the directions of [x]'s medical and/or psychological treatment providers, including ensuring [x] attends upon sessions, each of the parents attend upon sessions as recommended by the treatment providers and each of the parents shall follow through with all reasonable treatment recommendations. each parent shall be permitted to provide a copy of the family report of [ms n] dated 04 august 2021 and the court’s reasons for judgment to any of [x]'s medical or therapeutic treatment providers. that the father shall, within 14 days from the date of these orders, take steps to obtain a referral to a psychologist or psychiatrist, and attend on that medical professional to assist him in working through his feelings and attitude toward [x], and may provide a copy of the family report of [ms n] dated 4 august 2021 and the court’s reasons for judgment to assist him in obtaining the therapeutic support. within 14 days from the date of this order, the parents will attend on psychologist, mr v to develop a plan to manage the inconsistencies between the mother and father’s households which have made [x]'s transition between the households problematic, particularly in respect to the disciplinary actions taken by the parents in the event of any troubling behaviours exhibited by either [x] or [y]. upon the development of such a plan, the parents agree to implement such a regime in their respective households. extra-curricular activities should either parent wish to arrange any extra-curricular activity or service, sporting activity or service, tutoring or support service, weekend, holiday or other care, or any other service, activity or event for [x], that parent will:
33.1 arrange the service, activity or event to occur within their scheduled time with [x] unless otherwise agreed between the parents 33.2 facilitate all travel to and from the service, activity or event unless otherwise agreed between the parents, and 33.3 assume all related costs of the service, activity or event.
travel each parent shall be permitted to travel interstate with [x] during times that he is in their respective care, and outside of this by agreement in writing. if either parent proposes to travel interstate with [x], the parent who intends to travel shall provide at least one week’s notice to the other parent and will provide an itinerary and contact details. each parent shall be permitted to remove [x] from the commonwealth of australia during times that he is in their respective care, and outside of this by written agreement between the parents. if either parent proposes to remove [x] from the commonwealth of australia, the parent who intends to travel shall provide at least three weeks’ notice to the other parent and will provide an itinerary and contact details. the parent travelling interstate or overseas with [x] shall ensure that [x] is able to contact the other parent at all reasonable times. [x] may travel interstate or internationally without a parent present by written agreement between the parents. the mother shall retain [x]'s passport and birth certificate. the mother shall provide [x]'s passport to the father at least one week prior to travel, and the father shall return the passport to the mother within one week of returning. the mother shall promptly provide [x]'s birth certificate and/or passport upon request by the father for any official purpose, and the father shall promptly return them to the mother. family therapy if the parents agree that it would be beneficial for the family to engage in family therapy then, before involving [x] in any of those sessions, the parents shall:
43.1 organise a meeting between [mr v] and [mr m] and the proposed family therapist (treatment team) so that the medical practitioners may discuss appropriate boundaries to put in place during the therapeutic treatment. the parents shall only participate in this meeting if recommended by the treatment team, 43.2 before any proposed engagement pursuant to the plan outlined in 43.1 above, the parents shall arrange for either (or both) of [mr v] or [mr m] to have a one on one session with [x] to discuss the proposed treatment and encourage him to attend, and 43.3 if [x] agrees to attend the family therapy sessions, he shall do so in line with the boundaries specified in 43.1 and the parents each agree to follow those boundaries strictly for the purposes of such therapy. the father shall, within 7 days from the date of these orders, enrol in and complete: 44.1 a post-separation parenting course, and 44.2 ‘tune into kids’ program,
facilitated by any registered or authorised provider.
13. the parents shall ensure that the other is kept informed of: any medical problems or illnesses suffered by [y] while in their care, any medication that has been prescribed for [y], any social, school or religious functions which [y] is to attend, any medical practitioners that [y] has received treatment from and any other matter relevant to [y]'s welfare. in the event that [y] is hospitalised or receiving medical attention, the parent with whom [y] is in the care of, shall notify the other parent as soon as practicable after the first contact with either the medical practitioner, medical centre or hospital, and in any event within two (2) hours. that these orders are authority for any medical practitioner, dentist, counsellor or other health professional who treats [y] to provide information to the other parent upon request by the other parent, to the extent permitted by law. each parent is permitted to liaise directly with [y]'s school, sporting bodies and/or extra-curricular organisation to obtain any necessary information about [y]'s progress, and these orders are authority for the school, sporting bodies and/or other organisations to release such information as requested by the other parent to the extent permitted by law. these orders are authority for [y]'s school to provide to both parents with copies of [y]'s school reports, newsletters, photograph order forms and invitations to attend any activities which parents are invited to attend and for both parents to be named on all school and extracurricular records as emergency contacts. each parent is permitted to attend parent-teacher interviews, concerts, carnivals and other events involving [y]'s school, or in the context of extra-curricular activities to which parents are ordinarily invited, even if that event occurs at a time when [y] is in the care of the other parent pursuant to these orders.
the proceedings
3.1 week one: [x] spends time with his mother and [y] spends time with her father from 3.00pm or after school on friday to 6.00pm on sunday, 3.2 week two: [x] spends time with his father and [y] spends time with her mother from 3.00pm or after school on friday to 6.00pm on sunday, 3.3 week three: [x] and [y] spend time with their mother from 3.00pm or after school on friday to 6.00pm on sunday, and 3.4 week four: [x] and [y] spend time with their father from 3.00pm or after school on friday to 6.00pn on sunday. the father is restrained from bringing [x] into contact with children of this partner, [ms b] (“the b children”), without the written consent of the mother. [y] and [x] are each to have their own private bedroom in each household. that the parents shall ensure that [x] is restricted from entering any room in which [y] is sleeping, toileting, bathing, changing clothes or any other activity of a private nature, or during a time when [y] has expressed fear or anxiety and has requested that [x]'s access to her person be restricted for her safety and wellbeing. that the parties shall not leave the children in each other child’s company unsupervised for more than 30 minutes or as otherwise agreed between the parties. that the parties shall be permitted to communicate with [x] at all reasonable times and the parent with whom [x] is residing shall provide [x] with privacy at all these times. that the parties shall be permitted to communicate with [y] at all reasonable times and the parent with whom [y] is residing shall provide [y] with privacy at all these times. each parent shall facilitate all reasonable requests made by the children to communicate with the other child by telephone or video link. that both parents shall be permitted to change [y]'s school to [o school] or [ac school] and [x] to [q school].
special occasions: notwithstanding any other order and unless otherwise agreed [y] and [x] spend time with their mother on the following occasions:
12.1 from 3.00pm or after school on friday immediately before mother’s day until sunday at 6.00pm, 12.2 in even numbered years from 5.00pm on christmas even until 9.00am on boxing day. notwithstanding any other order and unless otherwise agreed [y] and [x] spend time with their father on the following occasions: 13.1 from 3.00pm or after school on the friday immediately before father’s day until sunday at 6.00pm, 13.2 in odd numbered year from 5.00pm on christmas eve until 9.00am on boxing day.
changeover on a day that [y] attends school changeover will be facilitated by the mother collecting [y] from school. on a day that [y] does not attend school changeover will occur at [suburb ad train station] with the father to drive [y] to [suburb ad train station] and the mother to collect her from that location. on a day that [x] attends school changeover will occur at [x]'s school or if by prior arrangement, [x] will travel to [town ae] train station and be collected by his father from there. on a day that [x] does not attend school changeover will occur via the father taking [x] to [town ae] train station and the mother collecting him from her nearest train station. additional orders each of the parties is restrained from denigrating the other parent, a member of the other parent’s family, or a member of the other parent’s household in the presence or within the hearing of the children or either of them. each of the parents is restrained from allowing the children or either of them from remaining in the presence of or remaining within the child/children’s hearing of any person denigrating the other parent, a member of the other parent’s family, or a member of the other parent’s household. each of the parties is restrained form discussing these proceedings with the exception of advising the children or either of them in relation to their movements between households, pursuant to these orders. each of the parties is restrained from discussing the issue of where the children or either of them will live with the children or either of them. each parent shall be permitted to receive and provide information to each of the children’s:
22.1 schools, 22.2 therapists, 22.3 psychologists, 22.4 paediatricians, 22.5 medical practitioners, in the event that either child experiences a medical emergency which requires the attendance of police or ambulance and hospitalisation the parent with the care of the child will forthwith notify the other parent by sms. both parents shall by virtue of these orders be permitted to attend upon any emergency treatment provider and be able to access information, treatment plans and be consulted in relation to any treatment offered. each parent shall keep the other advised of all treating medical practitioners including therapists, psychologists, paediatricians and psychiatrists. each parent shall advise the other of all appointments for the children in relation to order (22) herein prior to the appointment and both parents shall be at liberty to attend such appointments subject to the consent of the therapist. that both parties will follow the directions of the children’s medical, psychological treatment including ensuring the children attend on sessions and the parties attending on sessions as recommended and also the parties shall follow through on all reasonable treatment recommendations.
notation: that the mother is intending to move to the [region af] or sydney and in the event that she does so it is the mother’s intention to brain a 2 bedroom unit with a sunroom. the sunroom will be [y]'s bedroom. that in the event that [x] is staying with the father order (5) herein does not preclude [x] sleeping in another child’s bedroom as long as that child is not present. that in the event that the father is in sydney that the parties shall communicate with other another and use their best endeavours to facilitate time between [x] and his father. that in the event that the mother is on the [region ag] that the parties shall communicate with one another and use their best endeavours to facilitate time between [y] and her mother. that the parties will use their best endeavours to place a lock on each of the children’s bedrooms. the parties shall consider [ac school] as a placement for [y] and if it is not suitable [y] will be enrolled in [o school].
the evidence
live with us 60% of the time and with their father [mr aj] 40% of the time according to a formal parenting arrangement that includes time during school term and during school holidays.
includes a week-around arrangement from friday to friday during school terms, and the children living with me each weekday and some weekends in the holiday period at the end of each school term.
around three weeks at a time in each location, and the children spent most of the time with me each time i stayed in sydney.   has no worries with [x] and is not scared of him. she feels comfortable with him.[7]
a safety protocol restricting [x] from coming into physical contact with my children has been in place since 1 march 2019, following [x]’s alleged sexual assault of [s] in 2018 and the resulting family and community services (“facs”) investigation.
the outcome of the assessments determine your children are safe and not at risk that would warrant ongoing involvement by dcj[8]
on 19 february 2020 [x] masturbated in front of his therapist. it was no longer appropriate for me to seek for [x] to be reintegrated with the [b] children at that time.   had an extreme emotional episode including weeping uncontrollably, shaking, shouting, dropping to the floor and rocking back and forth in the middle of [as shopping centre].
... had an emotional episode/panic attack including hyperventilating, rocking back and forth, physically shaking, weeping uncontrollably, shouting and punching the inside of the car.
feeling incredibly unsafe in her mother’s home, concerned about his safety around her brother – [y] also reports having a difficult relationship with her mother [ms jessen].   reports feeling actively suicidal today after finding out the court has ordered her to return to her mother’s house to live full time with her in sydney ... [y] reports feeling incredibly unsafe in her mother’s home – the household includes her mother and her 14 year old brother [x]... [y] reports that [x] is also incredibly verbally and physically aggressive.   whitehouse] reports that [ms jessen] has a history of severe post-partum depression but no longer on medications.
until recently she had not told anyone about her fears at home in her mother’s house with significant emotional abuse from her mother and sexual/verbal/physical abuse by her brother.   in week 1, each child remain through the weekend with the parent with whom they live, (b) in week 2, the children change over and x spend time with his father and y spend time with her mother from 3:00pm friday until 6:00pm sunday, (c) in week 3, both children spend the weekend with their mother from 3:00pm on friday until 6:00pm on sunday, and (d) in week 4, both children spend the weekend with their father from 3:00pm on friday until 6:00pm on sunday.   in week 2, the children change over and x spend time with his father and y spend time with her mother from 3:00pm friday until 6:00pm sunday, (c) in week 3, both children spend the weekend with their mother from 3:00pm on friday until 6:00pm on sunday, and (d) in week 4, both children spend the weekend with their father from 3:00pm on friday until 6:00pm on sunday.   in week 3, both children spend the weekend with their mother from 3:00pm on friday until 6:00pm on sunday, and (d) in week 4, both children spend the weekend with their father from 3:00pm on friday until 6:00pm on sunday.   in week 4, both children spend the weekend with their father from 3:00pm on friday until 6:00pm on sunday.
...observed [y] to be arrogant and overly opinionated. she did not behave in any way like she felt unsafe with [ms jessen]. i offered [y] some [sweets], which she promptly refused after reading the ingredients, and with an aura of superiority said ‘it is against my moral beliefs’.  ] ... [y] visited [ms jessen] from 30 september to 3 october [2021], i saw [y] on 3 occasions. at no stage that i observed [y] to have any anxiety or fear of her mother, brother or me or any other member of her family. in fact the exact opposite was true as [y] behaved in a relaxed and normal way. noticeably, what did stand out to me was that this has been the first time in 18 months that [y] has been allowed by her father to stay with [ms jessen] for more than 2 days in a row. as [y] stayed with [ms jessen] for nearly 4 days, over the course of the longer time i saw a different [y], who transitioned from being guarded and petulant to becoming engaged with her mother, brother, extended family and her friends.
...implement any routines, discipline or chores as quote in his parenting of [x] and [y] follow spending time in the father’s household.
i recall being concerned when i witnessed [mr whitehouse] showing [y] violent footage of animals being slaughtered. in july 2015, i recall [mr whitehouse] had just informed the children that his mother, their grandmother, had died. soon after i saw [mr whitehouse] and [y] at [mr whitehouse]’s computer, [y] was wide-eyed and visibly shaken. [mr whitehouse] was showing [y] video footage of [animals being killed], after which [mr whitehouse] said “see this is what people do”.
the evidence of family consultant ms n – family report dated 4 august 2021 and cross examination  whitehouse] said that, ideally, he would love for [x] to live with him or spend more time with him. however, he said that [x] is not able to spend more time with him on the [region ag] because it is yet to be safe for [r], [s] and [t] [sic], who live with him more than half the time. he seemed to suggest that upon [x] having completed his therapy to address his impulsivity and his sexualised behaviours, it may be possible for [x] to spend more time with him, if it has been assessed as appropriate by [x] therapist.   whitehouse] advocated strongly for [y] to repair and have a positive relationship with [ms jessen] because he believes that this relationship is important for [y].
the family consultant raised with [mr whitehouse] at discrepancies about his account of [y]’s year, compared to both [y]’s account, and [ms jessen]’s account. in response to this, [mr whitehouse] said that [y] has had a “horrific year with her mother” (which shocked the family consultant). [mr whitehouse] (now) appeared to hold a substantially more alarming view about [y]’s time with [ms jessen]. in a nonchalant manner, he suggested that such time has generally been an extremely negative and harmful experience for [y]. it was very confusing and concerning to the family consultant, that [mr whitehouse] had not raised such concerns much earlier in his interview, when such questions were asked. when the discrepancy of his account of [y]’s time with [ms jessen] was raised by the family consultant, [mr whitehouse] made an attempt to explain this, however his explanation was not able to be followed by the family consultant. as part of his explanation, he appeared to indicate that he and [y] “suck it up” to comply with the interim orders. he further suggested that [y] spending time with [ms jessen] was to [y]’s detriment.   raised no serious concerns in either [ms jessen] saw [mr whitehouse]’s care. [x] described the different parenting and households. at his mother’s house, he said that there are “high expectations” (about school, rules and behaviour was bracket. he described his father’s house as “more chilled” the game time allowed unconditionally. [x] said that he is expected to undertake tours in both households, though disappeared more so at his mother’s house stop”  8] [y] said that her mental health started to deteriorate in 2017 when she encountered some difficulties in her relationships with both her mother and [x] and how they treated her. [y] said that some of [x]’s past behaviours to her (which have made her feel comfortable) are that he licks her feet and “can’t take his hands off me”. she said that she has felt unsafe when [x] has significant meltdowns (requiring police assistance) and when [x] touched her when they were in bed together. regarding her mother’s behaviour towards her, [y] said that [ms jessen] “gets mad at me and tells me off”. she alleged that [ms jessen] has pinned her down to the bed and not let her leave when she has wanted to. [y] said that [x] “has always been the favourite” child in the maternal home because of his additional needs. she commented that [ms jessen] “has always made excuses for him”. she said that [x] is “always in my space” and that this is dismissed by [ms jessen], saying to her “[x] has issues, it’s not his fault”. [139] [y] said that her mother stopping time with her father “for no reason” for a period (november 2019 – march 2020), caused her acute psychological distress and which resulted in a few suicide attempts. [y] has also said that her mother unfairly blamed her father for her lack of time spent with him ([y] said that she was told by [ms jessen] that her father was not seeing her because he refused to the sign the parenting agreement). [y] said that not seeing her father over this five-month period caused her to have a “mental breakdown”. [140] when [y] was asked about her relationship with [ms jessen], she launched into telling the family consultant her concerns, being that her mother, has accused her of having an eating disorder, is controlling, denied her support when she told her that [x] had touched her inappropriately, is always yelling and shouting at her, and that she is scared of her mother and of [x]. [y] said that most difficult aspect for her when in her mother’s past care, has been [ms jessen]’s alleged minimisation of her suicidal ideation and dismissal of her concerns about not feeling safe in her mother’s care. [141] [y] said that, by the easter school holidays of 2020, she resumed spending time with [mr whitehouse] and desired to remain in his care. [y] said that she when was made to return to her mother’s care (against her wishes), that her mental health “exploded” and that she then spent the weekend in an adolescent mental health ward. [y] said that following this, her mother agreed to allow her to keep her phone with her and call her father whenever she needed. with this in place, [y] said she felt she was able to return to her mother’s care. [y] said that in the car on the way home from the hospital, her mother then said that she would not allow her to have any of things that were agreed to whilst she was at the hospital. [y] said that her mother shouted at her the whole way home. [y] said that whilst in her mother’s care after this, her suicidal ideation and self-harm thoughts escalated and she said that she needed to return to the care of her father for her psychological wellbeing. [y] indicated that it supported her mental health greatly when the interim orders were changed to accommodate her living with her father in june 2020. [142] [y] said that since she and [x] have lived separately their relationship has “changed for the better”. she said that on their weekend together, [x] “still invades my space”, though she said that this is less than what is was when they were living together. [y] said that, at times, she can still feel unsafe around [x] because she “does not know where he is at”. [y] explained this to mean that she had no update about [x]’s progression of counselling for his sexualised behaviours. therefore, she has no knowledge if this has been addressed or remains a risk issue for her. [y] said that when she has asked [ms jessen] for information about this, [ms jessen] has told her that this is [x]’s business. [144] regarding her weekends with [ms jessen], [y] said that she “dreaded these” and that the only positive about these weekends for her was seeing [x]. [y] said that her mother can “lose control” and “become aggressive” towards her. she said that in the past, [ms jessen] has grabbed her wrists and forced her down to sit on the couch. [y] said that her mother’s behaviour scared her, and she has told her mother that she needed to go the police station to be safe. [y] said that this further escalated [ms jessen]’s loss of control and that she “froze”. [y] reflected that this incident greatly concerns her, as she knew she needed support and safety but she was unable to act on this, seemingly overcome with fear at the time. [y] said that her mother is “unable to control her temper”. [145] [y] said that, when in her mother’s care, [ms jessen] “demands” that [y] eats a non-vegan diet. [y] said that her mother wants her to have a bone density test because of her choice to be a vegan, which she said her mother is staunchly opposed too. [y] said that her mother has accused her of having an eating disorder, that she is forced to watch documentaries about eating disorders and that her mother forces her to eat meat. [y] spoke about being an ethical vegan, and eating healthy and ethically sourced foods. [y] said that she eats well and that this should be supported by her mother, as this is her right to choose and follow such a lifestyle. [y] suggested that a substantial source of her conflict with [ms jessen], as well as how her mother treats her, is related to her veganism. [146] [y] said that on her last weekend with her mother, [ms jessen] made her read an article that suggested children having a vegan diet grow up to be shorter and skinnier than non-vegan children. [y] said that her mother accused her of having an eating disorder and was verbally attacking of her in front of her friend and other members of the public when they were at [as shopping centre]. [y] said that, during this incident, she began to cry and shake and that people passing by stopped to ask if she was ok. [y], tearfully, then said to the family consultant, “you don’t understand how hard it is for me there, i don’t want to be there”. (spending time with [ms jessen]). [147] [y] had a clear view at the time of her family report interview, that she wants to spend no time with [ms jessen] because her mother is “not going to change her behaviour” (towards her). she said that her mother is “always yelling”, “controlling”, critical of her body and her vegan lifestyle and “forces me to eat meat”. [y] said that [ms jessen] “needs help”. [y] said that [ms jessen] interacts towards [x] in a similar way. she said that she is somewhat hopeful that family therapy may result in changes in her mother’s behaviour towards her, so that she could spend some time with [ms jessen] in the future. [y] had a clear view that such time in the future, should only be limited to the daytime and that she should not be alone in her mother’s care (suggesting [x] should also be present). [148] [y] reiterated in her interview, “i’m not safe, not at all, i don’t get a say in anything” (when in her mother’s care). [y] suggested that her overall experience of [ms jessen] accumulates to “trauma” for her, which she commented that she is still “going through”. [y] said that her relationship with her mother “needs help” and she said she would like to have an improved relationship with [ms jessen]. [y] said that a concern about family therapy is that [ms jessen] will convince the therapist that [ms jessen]’s narrative is the truth, over her narrative about her experience of her mother. [149] [y] had very strong views that she “has a right” to live with her father and she further asserted, “i’m safe there”. [150] [y] appeared very shocked when the family consultant discussed the possibility of the court making final orders that she live with [ms jessen]. it appeared almost inconceivable to [y] that remaining in her father’s care was questionable. [y] said that she would be scared if orders are made for her to live with her mother. she said that she cannot understand how such an arrangement is possible, based on her views about her safety.  9] [y] said that her mother stopping time with her father “for no reason” for a period (november 2019 – march 2020), caused her acute psychological distress and which resulted in a few suicide attempts. [y] has also said that her mother unfairly blamed her father for her lack of time spent with him ([y] said that she was told by [ms jessen] that her father was not seeing her because he refused to the sign the parenting agreement). [y] said that not seeing her father over this five-month period caused her to have a “mental breakdown”. [140] when [y] was asked about her relationship with [ms jessen], she launched into telling the family consultant her concerns, being that her mother, has accused her of having an eating disorder, is controlling, denied her support when she told her that [x] had touched her inappropriately, is always yelling and shouting at her, and that she is scared of her mother and of [x]. [y] said that most difficult aspect for her when in her mother’s past care, has been [ms jessen]’s alleged minimisation of her suicidal ideation and dismissal of her concerns about not feeling safe in her mother’s care. [141] [y] said that, by the easter school holidays of 2020, she resumed spending time with [mr whitehouse] and desired to remain in his care. [y] said that she when was made to return to her mother’s care (against her wishes), that her mental health “exploded” and that she then spent the weekend in an adolescent mental health ward. [y] said that following this, her mother agreed to allow her to keep her phone with her and call her father whenever she needed. with this in place, [y] said she felt she was able to return to her mother’s care. [y] said that in the car on the way home from the hospital, her mother then said that she would not allow her to have any of things that were agreed to whilst she was at the hospital. [y] said that her mother shouted at her the whole way home. [y] said that whilst in her mother’s care after this, her suicidal ideation and self-harm thoughts escalated and she said that she needed to return to the care of her father for her psychological wellbeing. [y] indicated that it supported her mental health greatly when the interim orders were changed to accommodate her living with her father in june 2020. [142] [y] said that since she and [x] have lived separately their relationship has “changed for the better”. she said that on their weekend together, [x] “still invades my space”, though she said that this is less than what is was when they were living together. [y] said that, at times, she can still feel unsafe around [x] because she “does not know where he is at”. [y] explained this to mean that she had no update about [x]’s progression of counselling for his sexualised behaviours. therefore, she has no knowledge if this has been addressed or remains a risk issue for her. [y] said that when she has asked [ms jessen] for information about this, [ms jessen] has told her that this is [x]’s business. [144] regarding her weekends with [ms jessen], [y] said that she “dreaded these” and that the only positive about these weekends for her was seeing [x]. [y] said that her mother can “lose control” and “become aggressive” towards her. she said that in the past, [ms jessen] has grabbed her wrists and forced her down to sit on the couch. [y] said that her mother’s behaviour scared her, and she has told her mother that she needed to go the police station to be safe. [y] said that this further escalated [ms jessen]’s loss of control and that she “froze”. [y] reflected that this incident greatly concerns her, as she knew she needed support and safety but she was unable to act on this, seemingly overcome with fear at the time. [y] said that her mother is “unable to control her temper”. [145] [y] said that, when in her mother’s care, [ms jessen] “demands” that [y] eats a non-vegan diet. [y] said that her mother wants her to have a bone density test because of her choice to be a vegan, which she said her mother is staunchly opposed too. [y] said that her mother has accused her of having an eating disorder, that she is forced to watch documentaries about eating disorders and that her mother forces her to eat meat. [y] spoke about being an ethical vegan, and eating healthy and ethically sourced foods. [y] said that she eats well and that this should be supported by her mother, as this is her right to choose and follow such a lifestyle. [y] suggested that a substantial source of her conflict with [ms jessen], as well as how her mother treats her, is related to her veganism. [146] [y] said that on her last weekend with her mother, [ms jessen] made her read an article that suggested children having a vegan diet grow up to be shorter and skinnier than non-vegan children. [y] said that her mother accused her of having an eating disorder and was verbally attacking of her in front of her friend and other members of the public when they were at [as shopping centre]. [y] said that, during this incident, she began to cry and shake and that people passing by stopped to ask if she was ok. [y], tearfully, then said to the family consultant, “you don’t understand how hard it is for me there, i don’t want to be there”. (spending time with [ms jessen]). [147] [y] had a clear view at the time of her family report interview, that she wants to spend no time with [ms jessen] because her mother is “not going to change her behaviour” (towards her). she said that her mother is “always yelling”, “controlling”, critical of her body and her vegan lifestyle and “forces me to eat meat”. [y] said that [ms jessen] “needs help”. [y] said that [ms jessen] interacts towards [x] in a similar way. she said that she is somewhat hopeful that family therapy may result in changes in her mother’s behaviour towards her, so that she could spend some time with [ms jessen] in the future. [y] had a clear view that such time in the future, should only be limited to the daytime and that she should not be alone in her mother’s care (suggesting [x] should also be present). [148] [y] reiterated in her interview, “i’m not safe, not at all, i don’t get a say in anything” (when in her mother’s care). [y] suggested that her overall experience of [ms jessen] accumulates to “trauma” for her, which she commented that she is still “going through”. [y] said that her relationship with her mother “needs help” and she said she would like to have an improved relationship with [ms jessen]. [y] said that a concern about family therapy is that [ms jessen] will convince the therapist that [ms jessen]’s narrative is the truth, over her narrative about her experience of her mother. [149] [y] had very strong views that she “has a right” to live with her father and she further asserted, “i’m safe there”. [150] [y] appeared very shocked when the family consultant discussed the possibility of the court making final orders that she live with [ms jessen]. it appeared almost inconceivable to [y] that remaining in her father’s care was questionable. [y] said that she would be scared if orders are made for her to live with her mother. she said that she cannot understand how such an arrangement is possible, based on her views about her safety.  0] when [y] was asked about her relationship with [ms jessen], she launched into telling the family consultant her concerns, being that her mother, has accused her of having an eating disorder, is controlling, denied her support when she told her that [x] had touched her inappropriately, is always yelling and shouting at her, and that she is scared of her mother and of [x]. [y] said that most difficult aspect for her when in her mother’s past care, has been [ms jessen]’s alleged minimisation of her suicidal ideation and dismissal of her concerns about not feeling safe in her mother’s care. [141] [y] said that, by the easter school holidays of 2020, she resumed spending time with [mr whitehouse] and desired to remain in his care. [y] said that she when was made to return to her mother’s care (against her wishes), that her mental health “exploded” and that she then spent the weekend in an adolescent mental health ward. [y] said that following this, her mother agreed to allow her to keep her phone with her and call her father whenever she needed. with this in place, [y] said she felt she was able to return to her mother’s care. [y] said that in the car on the way home from the hospital, her mother then said that she would not allow her to have any of things that were agreed to whilst she was at the hospital. [y] said that her mother shouted at her the whole way home. [y] said that whilst in her mother’s care after this, her suicidal ideation and self-harm thoughts escalated and she said that she needed to return to the care of her father for her psychological wellbeing. [y] indicated that it supported her mental health greatly when the interim orders were changed to accommodate her living with her father in june 2020. [142] [y] said that since she and [x] have lived separately their relationship has “changed for the better”. she said that on their weekend together, [x] “still invades my space”, though she said that this is less than what is was when they were living together. [y] said that, at times, she can still feel unsafe around [x] because she “does not know where he is at”. [y] explained this to mean that she had no update about [x]’s progression of counselling for his sexualised behaviours. therefore, she has no knowledge if this has been addressed or remains a risk issue for her. [y] said that when she has asked [ms jessen] for information about this, [ms jessen] has told her that this is [x]’s business. [144] regarding her weekends with [ms jessen], [y] said that she “dreaded these” and that the only positive about these weekends for her was seeing [x]. [y] said that her mother can “lose control” and “become aggressive” towards her. she said that in the past, [ms jessen] has grabbed her wrists and forced her down to sit on the couch. [y] said that her mother’s behaviour scared her, and she has told her mother that she needed to go the police station to be safe. [y] said that this further escalated [ms jessen]’s loss of control and that she “froze”. [y] reflected that this incident greatly concerns her, as she knew she needed support and safety but she was unable to act on this, seemingly overcome with fear at the time. [y] said that her mother is “unable to control her temper”. [145] [y] said that, when in her mother’s care, [ms jessen] “demands” that [y] eats a non-vegan diet. [y] said that her mother wants her to have a bone density test because of her choice to be a vegan, which she said her mother is staunchly opposed too. [y] said that her mother has accused her of having an eating disorder, that she is forced to watch documentaries about eating disorders and that her mother forces her to eat meat. [y] spoke about being an ethical vegan, and eating healthy and ethically sourced foods. [y] said that she eats well and that this should be supported by her mother, as this is her right to choose and follow such a lifestyle. [y] suggested that a substantial source of her conflict with [ms jessen], as well as how her mother treats her, is related to her veganism. [146] [y] said that on her last weekend with her mother, [ms jessen] made her read an article that suggested children having a vegan diet grow up to be shorter and skinnier than non-vegan children. [y] said that her mother accused her of having an eating disorder and was verbally attacking of her in front of her friend and other members of the public when they were at [as shopping centre]. [y] said that, during this incident, she began to cry and shake and that people passing by stopped to ask if she was ok. [y], tearfully, then said to the family consultant, “you don’t understand how hard it is for me there, i don’t want to be there”. (spending time with [ms jessen]). [147] [y] had a clear view at the time of her family report interview, that she wants to spend no time with [ms jessen] because her mother is “not going to change her behaviour” (towards her). she said that her mother is “always yelling”, “controlling”, critical of her body and her vegan lifestyle and “forces me to eat meat”. [y] said that [ms jessen] “needs help”. [y] said that [ms jessen] interacts towards [x] in a similar way. she said that she is somewhat hopeful that family therapy may result in changes in her mother’s behaviour towards her, so that she could spend some time with [ms jessen] in the future. [y] had a clear view that such time in the future, should only be limited to the daytime and that she should not be alone in her mother’s care (suggesting [x] should also be present). [148] [y] reiterated in her interview, “i’m not safe, not at all, i don’t get a say in anything” (when in her mother’s care). [y] suggested that her overall experience of [ms jessen] accumulates to “trauma” for her, which she commented that she is still “going through”. [y] said that her relationship with her mother “needs help” and she said she would like to have an improved relationship with [ms jessen]. [y] said that a concern about family therapy is that [ms jessen] will convince the therapist that [ms jessen]’s narrative is the truth, over her narrative about her experience of her mother. [149] [y] had very strong views that she “has a right” to live with her father and she further asserted, “i’m safe there”. [150] [y] appeared very shocked when the family consultant discussed the possibility of the court making final orders that she live with [ms jessen]. it appeared almost inconceivable to [y] that remaining in her father’s care was questionable. [y] said that she would be scared if orders are made for her to live with her mother. she said that she cannot understand how such an arrangement is possible, based on her views about her safety.  1] [y] said that, by the easter school holidays of 2020, she resumed spending time with [mr whitehouse] and desired to remain in his care. [y] said that she when was made to return to her mother’s care (against her wishes), that her mental health “exploded” and that she then spent the weekend in an adolescent mental health ward. [y] said that following this, her mother agreed to allow her to keep her phone with her and call her father whenever she needed. with this in place, [y] said she felt she was able to return to her mother’s care. [y] said that in the car on the way home from the hospital, her mother then said that she would not allow her to have any of things that were agreed to whilst she was at the hospital. [y] said that her mother shouted at her the whole way home. [y] said that whilst in her mother’s care after this, her suicidal ideation and self-harm thoughts escalated and she said that she needed to return to the care of her father for her psychological wellbeing. [y] indicated that it supported her mental health greatly when the interim orders were changed to accommodate her living with her father in june 2020. [142] [y] said that since she and [x] have lived separately their relationship has “changed for the better”. she said that on their weekend together, [x] “still invades my space”, though she said that this is less than what is was when they were living together. [y] said that, at times, she can still feel unsafe around [x] because she “does not know where he is at”. [y] explained this to mean that she had no update about [x]’s progression of counselling for his sexualised behaviours. therefore, she has no knowledge if this has been addressed or remains a risk issue for her. [y] said that when she has asked [ms jessen] for information about this, [ms jessen] has told her that this is [x]’s business. [144] regarding her weekends with [ms jessen], [y] said that she “dreaded these” and that the only positive about these weekends for her was seeing [x]. [y] said that her mother can “lose control” and “become aggressive” towards her. she said that in the past, [ms jessen] has grabbed her wrists and forced her down to sit on the couch. [y] said that her mother’s behaviour scared her, and she has told her mother that she needed to go the police station to be safe. [y] said that this further escalated [ms jessen]’s loss of control and that she “froze”. [y] reflected that this incident greatly concerns her, as she knew she needed support and safety but she was unable to act on this, seemingly overcome with fear at the time. [y] said that her mother is “unable to control her temper”. [145] [y] said that, when in her mother’s care, [ms jessen] “demands” that [y] eats a non-vegan diet. [y] said that her mother wants her to have a bone density test because of her choice to be a vegan, which she said her mother is staunchly opposed too. [y] said that her mother has accused her of having an eating disorder, that she is forced to watch documentaries about eating disorders and that her mother forces her to eat meat. [y] spoke about being an ethical vegan, and eating healthy and ethically sourced foods. [y] said that she eats well and that this should be supported by her mother, as this is her right to choose and follow such a lifestyle. [y] suggested that a substantial source of her conflict with [ms jessen], as well as how her mother treats her, is related to her veganism. [146] [y] said that on her last weekend with her mother, [ms jessen] made her read an article that suggested children having a vegan diet grow up to be shorter and skinnier than non-vegan children. [y] said that her mother accused her of having an eating disorder and was verbally attacking of her in front of her friend and other members of the public when they were at [as shopping centre]. [y] said that, during this incident, she began to cry and shake and that people passing by stopped to ask if she was ok. [y], tearfully, then said to the family consultant, “you don’t understand how hard it is for me there, i don’t want to be there”. (spending time with [ms jessen]). [147] [y] had a clear view at the time of her family report interview, that she wants to spend no time with [ms jessen] because her mother is “not going to change her behaviour” (towards her). she said that her mother is “always yelling”, “controlling”, critical of her body and her vegan lifestyle and “forces me to eat meat”. [y] said that [ms jessen] “needs help”. [y] said that [ms jessen] interacts towards [x] in a similar way. she said that she is somewhat hopeful that family therapy may result in changes in her mother’s behaviour towards her, so that she could spend some time with [ms jessen] in the future. [y] had a clear view that such time in the future, should only be limited to the daytime and that she should not be alone in her mother’s care (suggesting [x] should also be present). [148] [y] reiterated in her interview, “i’m not safe, not at all, i don’t get a say in anything” (when in her mother’s care). [y] suggested that her overall experience of [ms jessen] accumulates to “trauma” for her, which she commented that she is still “going through”. [y] said that her relationship with her mother “needs help” and she said she would like to have an improved relationship with [ms jessen]. [y] said that a concern about family therapy is that [ms jessen] will convince the therapist that [ms jessen]’s narrative is the truth, over her narrative about her experience of her mother. [149] [y] had very strong views that she “has a right” to live with her father and she further asserted, “i’m safe there”. [150] [y] appeared very shocked when the family consultant discussed the possibility of the court making final orders that she live with [ms jessen]. it appeared almost inconceivable to [y] that remaining in her father’s care was questionable. [y] said that she would be scared if orders are made for her to live with her mother. she said that she cannot understand how such an arrangement is possible, based on her views about her safety.  2] [y] said that since she and [x] have lived separately their relationship has “changed for the better”. she said that on their weekend together, [x] “still invades my space”, though she said that this is less than what is was when they were living together. [y] said that, at times, she can still feel unsafe around [x] because she “does not know where he is at”. [y] explained this to mean that she had no update about [x]’s progression of counselling for his sexualised behaviours. therefore, she has no knowledge if this has been addressed or remains a risk issue for her. [y] said that when she has asked [ms jessen] for information about this, [ms jessen] has told her that this is [x]’s business. [144] regarding her weekends with [ms jessen], [y] said that she “dreaded these” and that the only positive about these weekends for her was seeing [x]. [y] said that her mother can “lose control” and “become aggressive” towards her. she said that in the past, [ms jessen] has grabbed her wrists and forced her down to sit on the couch. [y] said that her mother’s behaviour scared her, and she has told her mother that she needed to go the police station to be safe. [y] said that this further escalated [ms jessen]’s loss of control and that she “froze”. [y] reflected that this incident greatly concerns her, as she knew she needed support and safety but she was unable to act on this, seemingly overcome with fear at the time. [y] said that her mother is “unable to control her temper”. [145] [y] said that, when in her mother’s care, [ms jessen] “demands” that [y] eats a non-vegan diet. [y] said that her mother wants her to have a bone density test because of her choice to be a vegan, which she said her mother is staunchly opposed too. [y] said that her mother has accused her of having an eating disorder, that she is forced to watch documentaries about eating disorders and that her mother forces her to eat meat. [y] spoke about being an ethical vegan, and eating healthy and ethically sourced foods. [y] said that she eats well and that this should be supported by her mother, as this is her right to choose and follow such a lifestyle. [y] suggested that a substantial source of her conflict with [ms jessen], as well as how her mother treats her, is related to her veganism. [146] [y] said that on her last weekend with her mother, [ms jessen] made her read an article that suggested children having a vegan diet grow up to be shorter and skinnier than non-vegan children. [y] said that her mother accused her of having an eating disorder and was verbally attacking of her in front of her friend and other members of the public when they were at [as shopping centre]. [y] said that, during this incident, she began to cry and shake and that people passing by stopped to ask if she was ok. [y], tearfully, then said to the family consultant, “you don’t understand how hard it is for me there, i don’t want to be there”. (spending time with [ms jessen]). [147] [y] had a clear view at the time of her family report interview, that she wants to spend no time with [ms jessen] because her mother is “not going to change her behaviour” (towards her). she said that her mother is “always yelling”, “controlling”, critical of her body and her vegan lifestyle and “forces me to eat meat”. [y] said that [ms jessen] “needs help”. [y] said that [ms jessen] interacts towards [x] in a similar way. she said that she is somewhat hopeful that family therapy may result in changes in her mother’s behaviour towards her, so that she could spend some time with [ms jessen] in the future. [y] had a clear view that such time in the future, should only be limited to the daytime and that she should not be alone in her mother’s care (suggesting [x] should also be present). [148] [y] reiterated in her interview, “i’m not safe, not at all, i don’t get a say in anything” (when in her mother’s care). [y] suggested that her overall experience of [ms jessen] accumulates to “trauma” for her, which she commented that she is still “going through”. [y] said that her relationship with her mother “needs help” and she said she would like to have an improved relationship with [ms jessen]. [y] said that a concern about family therapy is that [ms jessen] will convince the therapist that [ms jessen]’s narrative is the truth, over her narrative about her experience of her mother. [149] [y] had very strong views that she “has a right” to live with her father and she further asserted, “i’m safe there”. [150] [y] appeared very shocked when the family consultant discussed the possibility of the court making final orders that she live with [ms jessen]. it appeared almost inconceivable to [y] that remaining in her father’s care was questionable. [y] said that she would be scared if orders are made for her to live with her mother. she said that she cannot understand how such an arrangement is possible, based on her views about her safety.  4] regarding her weekends with [ms jessen], [y] said that she “dreaded these” and that the only positive about these weekends for her was seeing [x]. [y] said that her mother can “lose control” and “become aggressive” towards her. she said that in the past, [ms jessen] has grabbed her wrists and forced her down to sit on the couch. [y] said that her mother’s behaviour scared her, and she has told her mother that she needed to go the police station to be safe. [y] said that this further escalated [ms jessen]’s loss of control and that she “froze”. [y] reflected that this incident greatly concerns her, as she knew she needed support and safety but she was unable to act on this, seemingly overcome with fear at the time. [y] said that her mother is “unable to control her temper”. [145] [y] said that, when in her mother’s care, [ms jessen] “demands” that [y] eats a non-vegan diet. [y] said that her mother wants her to have a bone density test because of her choice to be a vegan, which she said her mother is staunchly opposed too. [y] said that her mother has accused her of having an eating disorder, that she is forced to watch documentaries about eating disorders and that her mother forces her to eat meat. [y] spoke about being an ethical vegan, and eating healthy and ethically sourced foods. [y] said that she eats well and that this should be supported by her mother, as this is her right to choose and follow such a lifestyle. [y] suggested that a substantial source of her conflict with [ms jessen], as well as how her mother treats her, is related to her veganism. [146] [y] said that on her last weekend with her mother, [ms jessen] made her read an article that suggested children having a vegan diet grow up to be shorter and skinnier than non-vegan children. [y] said that her mother accused her of having an eating disorder and was verbally attacking of her in front of her friend and other members of the public when they were at [as shopping centre]. [y] said that, during this incident, she began to cry and shake and that people passing by stopped to ask if she was ok. [y], tearfully, then said to the family consultant, “you don’t understand how hard it is for me there, i don’t want to be there”. (spending time with [ms jessen]). [147] [y] had a clear view at the time of her family report interview, that she wants to spend no time with [ms jessen] because her mother is “not going to change her behaviour” (towards her). she said that her mother is “always yelling”, “controlling”, critical of her body and her vegan lifestyle and “forces me to eat meat”. [y] said that [ms jessen] “needs help”. [y] said that [ms jessen] interacts towards [x] in a similar way. she said that she is somewhat hopeful that family therapy may result in changes in her mother’s behaviour towards her, so that she could spend some time with [ms jessen] in the future. [y] had a clear view that such time in the future, should only be limited to the daytime and that she should not be alone in her mother’s care (suggesting [x] should also be present). [148] [y] reiterated in her interview, “i’m not safe, not at all, i don’t get a say in anything” (when in her mother’s care). [y] suggested that her overall experience of [ms jessen] accumulates to “trauma” for her, which she commented that she is still “going through”. [y] said that her relationship with her mother “needs help” and she said she would like to have an improved relationship with [ms jessen]. [y] said that a concern about family therapy is that [ms jessen] will convince the therapist that [ms jessen]’s narrative is the truth, over her narrative about her experience of her mother. [149] [y] had very strong views that she “has a right” to live with her father and she further asserted, “i’m safe there”. [150] [y] appeared very shocked when the family consultant discussed the possibility of the court making final orders that she live with [ms jessen]. it appeared almost inconceivable to [y] that remaining in her father’s care was questionable. [y] said that she would be scared if orders are made for her to live with her mother. she said that she cannot understand how such an arrangement is possible, based on her views about her safety.  5] [y] said that, when in her mother’s care, [ms jessen] “demands” that [y] eats a non-vegan diet. [y] said that her mother wants her to have a bone density test because of her choice to be a vegan, which she said her mother is staunchly opposed too. [y] said that her mother has accused her of having an eating disorder, that she is forced to watch documentaries about eating disorders and that her mother forces her to eat meat. [y] spoke about being an ethical vegan, and eating healthy and ethically sourced foods. [y] said that she eats well and that this should be supported by her mother, as this is her right to choose and follow such a lifestyle. [y] suggested that a substantial source of her conflict with [ms jessen], as well as how her mother treats her, is related to her veganism. [146] [y] said that on her last weekend with her mother, [ms jessen] made her read an article that suggested children having a vegan diet grow up to be shorter and skinnier than non-vegan children. [y] said that her mother accused her of having an eating disorder and was verbally attacking of her in front of her friend and other members of the public when they were at [as shopping centre]. [y] said that, during this incident, she began to cry and shake and that people passing by stopped to ask if she was ok. [y], tearfully, then said to the family consultant, “you don’t understand how hard it is for me there, i don’t want to be there”. (spending time with [ms jessen]). [147] [y] had a clear view at the time of her family report interview, that she wants to spend no time with [ms jessen] because her mother is “not going to change her behaviour” (towards her). she said that her mother is “always yelling”, “controlling”, critical of her body and her vegan lifestyle and “forces me to eat meat”. [y] said that [ms jessen] “needs help”. [y] said that [ms jessen] interacts towards [x] in a similar way. she said that she is somewhat hopeful that family therapy may result in changes in her mother’s behaviour towards her, so that she could spend some time with [ms jessen] in the future. [y] had a clear view that such time in the future, should only be limited to the daytime and that she should not be alone in her mother’s care (suggesting [x] should also be present). [148] [y] reiterated in her interview, “i’m not safe, not at all, i don’t get a say in anything” (when in her mother’s care). [y] suggested that her overall experience of [ms jessen] accumulates to “trauma” for her, which she commented that she is still “going through”. [y] said that her relationship with her mother “needs help” and she said she would like to have an improved relationship with [ms jessen]. [y] said that a concern about family therapy is that [ms jessen] will convince the therapist that [ms jessen]’s narrative is the truth, over her narrative about her experience of her mother. [149] [y] had very strong views that she “has a right” to live with her father and she further asserted, “i’m safe there”. [150] [y] appeared very shocked when the family consultant discussed the possibility of the court making final orders that she live with [ms jessen]. it appeared almost inconceivable to [y] that remaining in her father’s care was questionable. [y] said that she would be scared if orders are made for her to live with her mother. she said that she cannot understand how such an arrangement is possible, based on her views about her safety.  6] [y] said that on her last weekend with her mother, [ms jessen] made her read an article that suggested children having a vegan diet grow up to be shorter and skinnier than non-vegan children. [y] said that her mother accused her of having an eating disorder and was verbally attacking of her in front of her friend and other members of the public when they were at [as shopping centre]. [y] said that, during this incident, she began to cry and shake and that people passing by stopped to ask if she was ok. [y], tearfully, then said to the family consultant, “you don’t understand how hard it is for me there, i don’t want to be there”. (spending time with [ms jessen]). [147] [y] had a clear view at the time of her family report interview, that she wants to spend no time with [ms jessen] because her mother is “not going to change her behaviour” (towards her). she said that her mother is “always yelling”, “controlling”, critical of her body and her vegan lifestyle and “forces me to eat meat”. [y] said that [ms jessen] “needs help”. [y] said that [ms jessen] interacts towards [x] in a similar way. she said that she is somewhat hopeful that family therapy may result in changes in her mother’s behaviour towards her, so that she could spend some time with [ms jessen] in the future. [y] had a clear view that such time in the future, should only be limited to the daytime and that she should not be alone in her mother’s care (suggesting [x] should also be present). [148] [y] reiterated in her interview, “i’m not safe, not at all, i don’t get a say in anything” (when in her mother’s care). [y] suggested that her overall experience of [ms jessen] accumulates to “trauma” for her, which she commented that she is still “going through”. [y] said that her relationship with her mother “needs help” and she said she would like to have an improved relationship with [ms jessen]. [y] said that a concern about family therapy is that [ms jessen] will convince the therapist that [ms jessen]’s narrative is the truth, over her narrative about her experience of her mother. [149] [y] had very strong views that she “has a right” to live with her father and she further asserted, “i’m safe there”. [150] [y] appeared very shocked when the family consultant discussed the possibility of the court making final orders that she live with [ms jessen]. it appeared almost inconceivable to [y] that remaining in her father’s care was questionable. [y] said that she would be scared if orders are made for her to live with her mother. she said that she cannot understand how such an arrangement is possible, based on her views about her safety.  7] [y] had a clear view at the time of her family report interview, that she wants to spend no time with [ms jessen] because her mother is “not going to change her behaviour” (towards her). she said that her mother is “always yelling”, “controlling”, critical of her body and her vegan lifestyle and “forces me to eat meat”. [y] said that [ms jessen] “needs help”. [y] said that [ms jessen] interacts towards [x] in a similar way. she said that she is somewhat hopeful that family therapy may result in changes in her mother’s behaviour towards her, so that she could spend some time with [ms jessen] in the future. [y] had a clear view that such time in the future, should only be limited to the daytime and that she should not be alone in her mother’s care (suggesting [x] should also be present). [148] [y] reiterated in her interview, “i’m not safe, not at all, i don’t get a say in anything” (when in her mother’s care). [y] suggested that her overall experience of [ms jessen] accumulates to “trauma” for her, which she commented that she is still “going through”. [y] said that her relationship with her mother “needs help” and she said she would like to have an improved relationship with [ms jessen]. [y] said that a concern about family therapy is that [ms jessen] will convince the therapist that [ms jessen]’s narrative is the truth, over her narrative about her experience of her mother. [149] [y] had very strong views that she “has a right” to live with her father and she further asserted, “i’m safe there”. [150] [y] appeared very shocked when the family consultant discussed the possibility of the court making final orders that she live with [ms jessen]. it appeared almost inconceivable to [y] that remaining in her father’s care was questionable. [y] said that she would be scared if orders are made for her to live with her mother. she said that she cannot understand how such an arrangement is possible, based on her views about her safety.  8] [y] reiterated in her interview, “i’m not safe, not at all, i don’t get a say in anything” (when in her mother’s care). [y] suggested that her overall experience of [ms jessen] accumulates to “trauma” for her, which she commented that she is still “going through”. [y] said that her relationship with her mother “needs help” and she said she would like to have an improved relationship with [ms jessen]. [y] said that a concern about family therapy is that [ms jessen] will convince the therapist that [ms jessen]’s narrative is the truth, over her narrative about her experience of her mother. [149] [y] had very strong views that she “has a right” to live with her father and she further asserted, “i’m safe there”. [150] [y] appeared very shocked when the family consultant discussed the possibility of the court making final orders that she live with [ms jessen]. it appeared almost inconceivable to [y] that remaining in her father’s care was questionable. [y] said that she would be scared if orders are made for her to live with her mother. she said that she cannot understand how such an arrangement is possible, based on her views about her safety.  9] [y] had very strong views that she “has a right” to live with her father and she further asserted, “i’m safe there”. [150] [y] appeared very shocked when the family consultant discussed the possibility of the court making final orders that she live with [ms jessen]. it appeared almost inconceivable to [y] that remaining in her father’s care was questionable. [y] said that she would be scared if orders are made for her to live with her mother. she said that she cannot understand how such an arrangement is possible, based on her views about her safety.  0] [y] appeared very shocked when the family consultant discussed the possibility of the court making final orders that she live with [ms jessen]. it appeared almost inconceivable to [y] that remaining in her father’s care was questionable. [y] said that she would be scared if orders are made for her to live with her mother. she said that she cannot understand how such an arrangement is possible, based on her views about her safety.  7] ... [y] is adamant that she remained living with [mr whitehouse]. it appeared in almost impossibility for [y] to resume spending time, by having future time with [ms jessen] because it is “unsafe” her to be in her mother’s current care. [y] had very strong views that time with her mother is not able to even be considered, until substantial changes are made by [ms jessen] (about how her mother treats and parents are)...  3] ... even with the repair of [y]’s and [ms jessen]’s relationship, it does not appear realistic that [y] returned to live with [ms jessen] and [x] at a later stage in her adolescence. it appeared that for [y], her required parenting arrangement is with the father and she be raised primarily within the family unit of [mr whitehouse], [ms b] and her children, as these are very significant important relationships for her.
... somewhat aligned to her father, caused by [y]’s perception, or possible experience, of her mother’s shortcomings in a parenting, resulting in [y] feeling unsafe and abused.
...there would appear to be a great risk of serious mental health implications for [y], in the event that ... orders are made against [y]’s wishes. the family consultant considers that [y] is very unlikely to comply with such an order. it is therefore recommended that [y] remain in [mr whitehouse]’s care.
i think that if she is to live with her dad in the [region ag], that may be of benefit to [y] if she did week on/week off, to have regular access to also her social life and school friends every other week in the school holidays, so she is not substantially missing out on time up there.
...if the parents are still having problems communicating and in the co-parenting relationship, then family therapy would still be recommended.
the law  whether the child spending equal time with each parent would be in the best interest of the child,[15] and (b) whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[16]   whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[16]
a discretionary judgment concerning the parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.[18]  ] in considering an allegation of sexual abuse, the court should not make a positive finding that the allegation is true unless the court is so satisfied according to the civil standard of proof, with due regard to the factors mentioned in briginshaw v briginshaw [1938] hca 34, (1938) 60 clr 336 at 362 ... [23] no doubt there will be some cases in which the court is able to come to a positive finding that the allegation is well-founded. in all but the most extraordinary cases, that finding will have a decisive impact on the order to be made respecting custody and access. there will be cases also in which the court has no hesitation in rejecting the allegation as groundless ... [24] in resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assessing the magnitude of that risk. after all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child, the family court is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child's welfare. the existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access. in access cases, the magnitude of the risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access ... [25] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child's paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  ] no doubt there will be some cases in which the court is able to come to a positive finding that the allegation is well-founded. in all but the most extraordinary cases, that finding will have a decisive impact on the order to be made respecting custody and access. there will be cases also in which the court has no hesitation in rejecting the allegation as groundless ... [24] in resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assessing the magnitude of that risk. after all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child, the family court is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child's welfare. the existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access. in access cases, the magnitude of the risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access ... [25] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child's paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  ] in resolving the wider issue the court must determine whether on the evidence there is a risk of sexual abuse occurring if custody or access be granted and assessing the magnitude of that risk. after all, in deciding what is in the best interests of a child, the family court is frequently called upon to assess and evaluate the likelihood or possibility of events or occurrences which, if they come about, will have a detrimental impact on the child's welfare. the existence and magnitude of the risk of sexual abuse, as with other risks of harm to the welfare of a child, is a fundamental matter to be taken into account in deciding issues of custody and access. in access cases, the magnitude of the risk may be less if the order in contemplation is supervised access ... [25] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child's paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  ] ... in devising these tests the courts have endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child's paramount interests, to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from parental access. to achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will not grant custody or access to a parent if that custody or access would expose the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.  1] ... we accept as a matter of practice, a trial judge will almost inevitably be required in a case where sexual abuse allegations are raised to consider whether abuse has been proven on the balance of probabilities as well as considering whether or not an unacceptable risk of abuse exists ...  ] in his recent paper entitled ‘unacceptable risk – a return to basics’ the hon. john fogarty a.m. set out his summary of the principles emerging from m and m as follows:
1 the decisive issue is and always remains the best interests of that child. all other issues are subservient. 2 the nature of the risk is best expressed by the term ‘unacceptable risk’. it is an evaluation of the nature and degree of the risk and whether, with or without safeguards, it is acceptable. 3 where past abuse of a child is alleged it is usually neither necessary nor desirable to reach a definitive conclusion on that issue. where, however, that is done the briginshaw civil standard of proof applies. 4 the circumstance, if it be so, that the allegation of past abuse is not proved in accordance with briginshaw, does not impede reliance upon those circumstances in determining whether there is an unacceptable risk. 5 the concentration in these cases should normally be upon the question whether there is an unacceptable risk to the child. 6 the onus of proof in reaching that conclusion is the ordinary civil standard. 7 but the components which go to make up that conclusion need not each be established on the balance of probabilities. the court may reach a conclusion of unacceptable risk from the accumulation of factors, none or some only of which, are proved to that standard.
and thereafter expanded some points contained in the summary.  ] frequently, (i would respectfully venture, too frequently) “risk” is referred to as an all-embracing term, a “general” finding of which can (purportedly) be seen to have some form of “ipso facto consequences” for the orders made. yet, “risk” is, without more, but a convenient description, orders must, surely, address its constituent components which must, axiomatically, vary according to the circumstances of each case. [72] in that respect, it is both interesting and instructive to refer to what has been said about this issue first by the honourable john fogarty am, and, secondly, by an english author, (the latter qualified as both a psychiatrist and a barrister.) [73] the latter said:  ] in that respect, it is both interesting and instructive to refer to what has been said about this issue first by the honourable john fogarty am, and, secondly, by an english author, (the latter qualified as both a psychiatrist and a barrister.) [73] the latter said:  ] the latter said:
risk assessment in any situation involves, in essence, the asking of the following questions: (1) what harmful outcome is potentially present in this situation? (2) what is the probability of this outcome coming about? (3) what risks are probable in this situation in the short, medium and long term? (4) what are the factors that could increase or decrease the risk that is probable? (5) what measures are available whose deployment could mitigate the risks that are probable? (b. mahendra, 'psychiatric risk assessment in family and child law' (2008) 38 family law 569).  ] mr fogarty, writing in the australian journal of family law said this (20 ajfl 249 at 254-5):
... the reality is that all courts deal with issues of "risk" and degrees of risk (however described) in various situations and that concept is increasingly used in legislation. risk is difficult to define in a way which is not ultimately circular. but it is an inevitable part of life at all its levels. it is inherently risky to breathe, eat, drink, walk, drive, work, invest and play. the world is full of different risks and consequences and everyone is prone to dangers. we confront varying levels of risk everyday. people frequently face potentially dangerous situations, not many live at home in complete isolation to avoid getting in harms way. most people try to avoid what they perceive to be risk, some willingly take on high risk activities. risk involves two component, the degree of "likelihood" of the happening of an event, and the possible consequences (good or bad) if it does [cases and citations omitted]. individuals in their assessment of some risks may focus more on one than the other of these components. but at some point it usually becomes necessary for that person to make a judgment of the risk and whether it can/should be taken. where the risk relates to a third person to whom one owes a responsibility, it is likely in the nature of things that the estimate will be conservative. risks are relative and usually involve trade-offs. crossing the road with oncoming traffic to catch the last connection to the airport involves the risk of being hit by a car or the risk of missing the plane. very much a balancing exercise of facts, experience and intuition, but essentially which risk carries the greater detriment (usually the car). then there is the common experience of a mother watching her child cross a road to go to school. the risk is seen as greater (although it may not be) because the consequences may be death or injury to the child and because the responsibilities of the mother will be seen by her as greater than for herself or another adult .... at times the courts and the legislature have attempted to give an indication of the content or quality of the risk -- otherwise “risk” may mean any risk, however small or unlikely. hence the use of adjectives such as “serious”, “grave”, “real”, “appreciable” and “unacceptable”.  ] i respectfully agree, as i also do with mr fogarty's statement (which also has echoes in the english author's statement earlier quoted) that:
... unacceptable risk in the high court's formulation [in m v m (1988) 166 clr 69] requires two separate steps. is there a risk, and is it unacceptable? the concentration by the high court is upon both the nature and the degree of risk in the particular case. its formulation is all about balance. in some cases a risk is "acceptable" when balanced against other factors and other orders. the object of safeguards is to convert an unacceptable situation to an acceptable one where that is feasible and is of "benefit to the child". it is, as i suggested earlier, calibrated to its use in individual cases. it is unrelated to the exoneration or otherwise of the alleged abuser, it is all about the bests interests of the child and protection from risk
section 60cc – the primary considerations
... it will be in [y]’s best interest to re-establish a relationship of trust, openness and emotional closeness with [ms jessen]. [y] has specific and emotionally triggering memories of interactions with her mother that is currently negatively impacting on her sense of trust and feeling safe when she is with her mother. my recommendation would be to continue with counselling to ensure a sense of safety for [y] and to increase the time spent with her mother over time. i would however strongly recommend that she is given an opportunity to participate in establishing a program of increased time with her mother is forcing her to comply with spending increased time will most probably be detrimental to her mental health.
section 60cc – the additional considerations.
any views expressed by y and any factors (such as y’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to y’s views 7] ... that she wants to spend no time with [ms jessen] because the mother is ‘not going to change her behaviour’ (towards her). ..... she said that she is somewhat hopeful that family therapy may result in changes in her mother’s behaviour towards her, so that she could spend some time with [ms jessen] in the future. [y] had a clear view that such time in the future, should only be limited to the daytime and that she should not be alone in her mother’s care (suggesting [x] should also be present).
the nature of the relationship of y with each of her parents and with other persons.
the extent to which each of y’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to y, to spend time with y, and to communicate with y.
the extent to which each of y’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain y.
the likely effect of any changes in y’s circumstances, including the likely effect on y of any separation from either of her parents, or any other child, or other person with whom she has been living.
the practical difficulty and expense of y spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect y’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis.
the capacity of each of y’s parents and any other person to provide for the needs of y, including her emotional and intellectual needs.
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of y and of either of y’s parents, and any other characteristics of y that the court thinks are relevant.
the attitude to y, and the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of y’s parents.
parental responsibility –section 61da
section 65daa - equal time, or substantial and significant time?
is it in y’s best interest to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents?
what orders are determined to be proper to be made in y’s best interests with her interests as the paramount consideration
are proper to be made.
concluding remarks
associate: dated: 24 april 2023
dated: 24 april 2023
[1] exhibit iclb14.[2] transcript 8 november 2021 page 7, lines 3 to 28.[3] exhibit a6.[4] exhibit r1.[5] exhibit r3, 41.[6] this entity is now known as the department of communities and justice.[7] exhibit iclb6.[8] exhibit “ir1”, part “c” to mother’s affidavit dated 14 october 2021.[9] exhibit r6, 229, 232.[10] exhibit r5, 187.[11] original emphasis.[12] exhibit iclb14.[13] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(2).[14] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da(4).[15] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(a).[16] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(b).[17] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(c).[18] grella & jamieson [2017] famcafc 21, [18].[19] exhibit a6.