last updated: 14 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
wu & leong [2023] fedcfamc2f 480
orders
pursuant to pt viii of the family law act 1975 (cth), the court orders that:
the real properties  do all such things as are necessary to transfer her right, title and interest in the real property and improvements comprising volume ... folio ... edition ... being the property more commonly known as a street, suburb b in region t (“the suburb b property”) to the husband, who is declared the sole legal and beneficial owner of the property. (b) do all such things as are necessary to discharge any loans in joint names, whether or not secured by mortgage registered over the suburb f property, to indemnify and keep indemnified the husband against any and all liabilities connected to the suburb f property. (c) do all such things as are necessary to discharge any loans in joint names, whether or not secured by mortgage registered over the suburb d property, to indemnify and keep indemnified the husband against any and all liabilities connected to the suburb d property.   do all such things as are necessary to discharge any loans in joint names, whether or not secured by mortgage registered over the suburb f property, to indemnify and keep indemnified the husband against any and all liabilities connected to the suburb f property. (c) do all such things as are necessary to discharge any loans in joint names, whether or not secured by mortgage registered over the suburb d property, to indemnify and keep indemnified the husband against any and all liabilities connected to the suburb d property.   do all such things as are necessary to discharge any loans in joint names, whether or not secured by mortgage registered over the suburb d property, to indemnify and keep indemnified the husband against any and all liabilities connected to the suburb d property.   do all such things as are necessary to transfer his right, title and interest in the real property and improvements comprising lot ... ps..., volume ... folio ... being the property more commonly known as e street, suburb f in the state of victoria (“the suburb f property”) to the wife, who is declared the sole legal and beneficial owner of the property. (b) do all such things as are necessary to transfer his right, title and interest in the real property and improvements comprising volume ... folio ... edition ... being the property more commonly known as c street, suburb d in region t (“the suburb d property”) to the wife, who is declared the sole legal and beneficial owner of the property. (c) do all such things as are necessary to discharge any loans in joint names, whether or not secured by mortgage registered over the suburb b property, to indemnify and keep indemnified the wife against any and all liabilities connected to the suburb b property. (d) provide to the wife copies of all documents and information with respect to any tenancy or occupation agreements or arrangements with respect to the suburb f property and the suburb d property.   do all such things as are necessary to transfer his right, title and interest in the real property and improvements comprising volume ... folio ... edition ... being the property more commonly known as c street, suburb d in region t (“the suburb d property”) to the wife, who is declared the sole legal and beneficial owner of the property. (c) do all such things as are necessary to discharge any loans in joint names, whether or not secured by mortgage registered over the suburb b property, to indemnify and keep indemnified the wife against any and all liabilities connected to the suburb b property. (d) provide to the wife copies of all documents and information with respect to any tenancy or occupation agreements or arrangements with respect to the suburb f property and the suburb d property.   do all such things as are necessary to discharge any loans in joint names, whether or not secured by mortgage registered over the suburb b property, to indemnify and keep indemnified the wife against any and all liabilities connected to the suburb b property. (d) provide to the wife copies of all documents and information with respect to any tenancy or occupation agreements or arrangements with respect to the suburb f property and the suburb d property.   provide to the wife copies of all documents and information with respect to any tenancy or occupation agreements or arrangements with respect to the suburb f property and the suburb d property.   is restrained by injunction from increasing the loan amount secured by mortgage, using the suburb f property as security for any further borrowings or otherwise encumbering the suburb f property in any manner, (b) shall be responsible for all mortgage payments, statutory rates and charges, other utilities, insurances, outgoings and expenses in relation to the suburb f property incurred prior to the date of transfer and shall make all such payments as and when they fall due and hereby indemnifies the wife in respect of all other liabilities incurred prior to the date of transfer.   shall be responsible for all mortgage payments, statutory rates and charges, other utilities, insurances, outgoings and expenses in relation to the suburb f property incurred prior to the date of transfer and shall make all such payments as and when they fall due and hereby indemnifies the wife in respect of all other liabilities incurred prior to the date of transfer.   is restrained by injunction from increasing the loan amount secured by mortgage, using the suburb d property as security for any further borrowings or otherwise encumbering the suburb d property in any manner, (b) shall be responsible for all mortgage payments, statutory rates and charges, other utilities, insurances, outgoings and expenses in relation to the suburb d property incurred prior to the date of transfer and shall make all such payments as and when they fall due and hereby indemnifies the wife in respect of all other liabilities incurred prior to the date of transfer.   shall be responsible for all mortgage payments, statutory rates and charges, other utilities, insurances, outgoings and expenses in relation to the suburb d property incurred prior to the date of transfer and shall make all such payments as and when they fall due and hereby indemnifies the wife in respect of all other liabilities incurred prior to the date of transfer.
default  to pay out any loan accounts required to discharge any mortgages registered over the titles to the suburb f property and the suburb d property, (b) to pay all reasonable costs, commissions and expenses of the sale that were not paid upfront by the wife, (c) the usual rates adjustments, (d) payment to the husband of the amount of $133,193 plus interest calculated in accordance with the interest rate prescribed by the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 from the date of default until the date of payment, (e) the balance then remaining to be paid to the wife.   to pay all reasonable costs, commissions and expenses of the sale that were not paid upfront by the wife, (c) the usual rates adjustments, (d) payment to the husband of the amount of $133,193 plus interest calculated in accordance with the interest rate prescribed by the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 from the date of default until the date of payment, (e) the balance then remaining to be paid to the wife.   the usual rates adjustments, (d) payment to the husband of the amount of $133,193 plus interest calculated in accordance with the interest rate prescribed by the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 from the date of default until the date of payment, (e) the balance then remaining to be paid to the wife.   payment to the husband of the amount of $133,193 plus interest calculated in accordance with the interest rate prescribed by the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 from the date of default until the date of payment, (e) the balance then remaining to be paid to the wife.   the balance then remaining to be paid to the wife.   to pay out any loan accounts required to discharge any mortgage registered over the title to the suburb b property, (b) to pay all reasonable costs, commissions and expenses of the sale that were not paid upfront by the husband, (c) the usual rates adjustments, (d) the balance then remaining to be paid to the husband.   to pay all reasonable costs, commissions and expenses of the sale that were not paid upfront by the husband, (c) the usual rates adjustments, (d) the balance then remaining to be paid to the husband.   the usual rates adjustments, (d) the balance then remaining to be paid to the husband.   the balance then remaining to be paid to the husband.
capital gains tax
the super fund h interest  confirmation of procedural fairness being accorded to the trustee of super fund h, and (i) confirmation the trustee of super fund h does not object to the terms of orders 16-17 which bind the trustee, or (ii) confirmation the trustee of super fund h has not given written notice of any objection within 28 days of being notified of the terms of orders 16-17 to bind the trustee.   confirmation the trustee of super fund h does not object to the terms of orders 16-17 which bind the trustee, or (ii) confirmation the trustee of super fund h has not given written notice of any objection within 28 days of being notified of the terms of orders 16-17 to bind the trustee.  ) confirmation the trustee of super fund h has not given written notice of any objection within 28 days of being notified of the terms of orders 16-17 to bind the trustee.
and it is noted:
other  each party shall be the sole legal and beneficial owner (as between the parties) of all other real assets, personal assets, and superannuation interests in their respective possession as at the date of these orders, for which purpose superannuation interests are deemed to be in the possession of the named superannuant, and (b) each party shall be solely liable for and shall indemnify the other against any and all debts attaching or relating to the real and personal property in their respective possession, and any other debts in their respective sole names.   each party shall be solely liable for and shall indemnify the other against any and all debts attaching or relating to the real and personal property in their respective possession, and any other debts in their respective sole names.
terms of sale of property  the vendor shall instruct a solicitor chosen by them to do all legal work associated with conducting the sale of the property. (b) the vendor will pay all costs associated with the sale of the property. (c) the listing and sale price of the property shall be as determined by the vendor. (d) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property agent in relation to the property sale. (e) that upon an offer being accepted for sale of the property, the vendor shall within 48 hours execute the contract of sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale of the property including all transfer documentation forthwith upon its submission to her by the property agent or their solicitor. (f) the contract of sale shall provide for completion within 42 days after the date of the contract. (g) in the event the property is not sold by private treaty pursuant to the above provisions or on or before three (3) calendar months from the date it is first listed, then vendor shall do all acts and sign all documents as are necessary to sell the property by auction and the following shall apply: (i) the property shall be listed with the agent appointed under order 27 (hereinafter called “the property auctioneer”) for sale by auction within a further two (2) months. (ii) the vendor shall execute all documents requested by the property auctioneer for sale of the property by auction. (iii) the vendor shall determine the property reserve price in consultation with the property auctioneer. (iv) the vendor shall pay to the property auctioneer any sums requested for advertising or auction expenses. (v) the vendor shall give such instructions as are necessary to the solicitor appointed under order 27(a) to prepare a contract of sale and provide it to the property auctioneer prior to the auction, no later than the date sought by the property auctioneer. (vi) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor. (h) in the event the property is not sold at the auction pursuant to order 27(g) (and the sub-paragraphs) or within fourteen (14) days after the date of the auction by further negotiation, then the vendor shall cause a further auction of the property to be held within two (2) months after the date of the first auction and at two (2) monthly intervals until sold.   the vendor will pay all costs associated with the sale of the property. (c) the listing and sale price of the property shall be as determined by the vendor. (d) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property agent in relation to the property sale. (e) that upon an offer being accepted for sale of the property, the vendor shall within 48 hours execute the contract of sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale of the property including all transfer documentation forthwith upon its submission to her by the property agent or their solicitor. (f) the contract of sale shall provide for completion within 42 days after the date of the contract. (g) in the event the property is not sold by private treaty pursuant to the above provisions or on or before three (3) calendar months from the date it is first listed, then vendor shall do all acts and sign all documents as are necessary to sell the property by auction and the following shall apply: (i) the property shall be listed with the agent appointed under order 27 (hereinafter called “the property auctioneer”) for sale by auction within a further two (2) months. (ii) the vendor shall execute all documents requested by the property auctioneer for sale of the property by auction. (iii) the vendor shall determine the property reserve price in consultation with the property auctioneer. (iv) the vendor shall pay to the property auctioneer any sums requested for advertising or auction expenses. (v) the vendor shall give such instructions as are necessary to the solicitor appointed under order 27(a) to prepare a contract of sale and provide it to the property auctioneer prior to the auction, no later than the date sought by the property auctioneer. (vi) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor. (h) in the event the property is not sold at the auction pursuant to order 27(g) (and the sub-paragraphs) or within fourteen (14) days after the date of the auction by further negotiation, then the vendor shall cause a further auction of the property to be held within two (2) months after the date of the first auction and at two (2) monthly intervals until sold.   the listing and sale price of the property shall be as determined by the vendor. (d) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property agent in relation to the property sale. (e) that upon an offer being accepted for sale of the property, the vendor shall within 48 hours execute the contract of sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale of the property including all transfer documentation forthwith upon its submission to her by the property agent or their solicitor. (f) the contract of sale shall provide for completion within 42 days after the date of the contract. (g) in the event the property is not sold by private treaty pursuant to the above provisions or on or before three (3) calendar months from the date it is first listed, then vendor shall do all acts and sign all documents as are necessary to sell the property by auction and the following shall apply: (i) the property shall be listed with the agent appointed under order 27 (hereinafter called “the property auctioneer”) for sale by auction within a further two (2) months. (ii) the vendor shall execute all documents requested by the property auctioneer for sale of the property by auction. (iii) the vendor shall determine the property reserve price in consultation with the property auctioneer. (iv) the vendor shall pay to the property auctioneer any sums requested for advertising or auction expenses. (v) the vendor shall give such instructions as are necessary to the solicitor appointed under order 27(a) to prepare a contract of sale and provide it to the property auctioneer prior to the auction, no later than the date sought by the property auctioneer. (vi) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor. (h) in the event the property is not sold at the auction pursuant to order 27(g) (and the sub-paragraphs) or within fourteen (14) days after the date of the auction by further negotiation, then the vendor shall cause a further auction of the property to be held within two (2) months after the date of the first auction and at two (2) monthly intervals until sold.   the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property agent in relation to the property sale. (e) that upon an offer being accepted for sale of the property, the vendor shall within 48 hours execute the contract of sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale of the property including all transfer documentation forthwith upon its submission to her by the property agent or their solicitor. (f) the contract of sale shall provide for completion within 42 days after the date of the contract. (g) in the event the property is not sold by private treaty pursuant to the above provisions or on or before three (3) calendar months from the date it is first listed, then vendor shall do all acts and sign all documents as are necessary to sell the property by auction and the following shall apply: (i) the property shall be listed with the agent appointed under order 27 (hereinafter called “the property auctioneer”) for sale by auction within a further two (2) months. (ii) the vendor shall execute all documents requested by the property auctioneer for sale of the property by auction. (iii) the vendor shall determine the property reserve price in consultation with the property auctioneer. (iv) the vendor shall pay to the property auctioneer any sums requested for advertising or auction expenses. (v) the vendor shall give such instructions as are necessary to the solicitor appointed under order 27(a) to prepare a contract of sale and provide it to the property auctioneer prior to the auction, no later than the date sought by the property auctioneer. (vi) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor. (h) in the event the property is not sold at the auction pursuant to order 27(g) (and the sub-paragraphs) or within fourteen (14) days after the date of the auction by further negotiation, then the vendor shall cause a further auction of the property to be held within two (2) months after the date of the first auction and at two (2) monthly intervals until sold.   that upon an offer being accepted for sale of the property, the vendor shall within 48 hours execute the contract of sale and all other documents necessary to complete the sale of the property including all transfer documentation forthwith upon its submission to her by the property agent or their solicitor. (f) the contract of sale shall provide for completion within 42 days after the date of the contract. (g) in the event the property is not sold by private treaty pursuant to the above provisions or on or before three (3) calendar months from the date it is first listed, then vendor shall do all acts and sign all documents as are necessary to sell the property by auction and the following shall apply: (i) the property shall be listed with the agent appointed under order 27 (hereinafter called “the property auctioneer”) for sale by auction within a further two (2) months. (ii) the vendor shall execute all documents requested by the property auctioneer for sale of the property by auction. (iii) the vendor shall determine the property reserve price in consultation with the property auctioneer. (iv) the vendor shall pay to the property auctioneer any sums requested for advertising or auction expenses. (v) the vendor shall give such instructions as are necessary to the solicitor appointed under order 27(a) to prepare a contract of sale and provide it to the property auctioneer prior to the auction, no later than the date sought by the property auctioneer. (vi) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor. (h) in the event the property is not sold at the auction pursuant to order 27(g) (and the sub-paragraphs) or within fourteen (14) days after the date of the auction by further negotiation, then the vendor shall cause a further auction of the property to be held within two (2) months after the date of the first auction and at two (2) monthly intervals until sold.   the contract of sale shall provide for completion within 42 days after the date of the contract. (g) in the event the property is not sold by private treaty pursuant to the above provisions or on or before three (3) calendar months from the date it is first listed, then vendor shall do all acts and sign all documents as are necessary to sell the property by auction and the following shall apply: (i) the property shall be listed with the agent appointed under order 27 (hereinafter called “the property auctioneer”) for sale by auction within a further two (2) months. (ii) the vendor shall execute all documents requested by the property auctioneer for sale of the property by auction. (iii) the vendor shall determine the property reserve price in consultation with the property auctioneer. (iv) the vendor shall pay to the property auctioneer any sums requested for advertising or auction expenses. (v) the vendor shall give such instructions as are necessary to the solicitor appointed under order 27(a) to prepare a contract of sale and provide it to the property auctioneer prior to the auction, no later than the date sought by the property auctioneer. (vi) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor. (h) in the event the property is not sold at the auction pursuant to order 27(g) (and the sub-paragraphs) or within fourteen (14) days after the date of the auction by further negotiation, then the vendor shall cause a further auction of the property to be held within two (2) months after the date of the first auction and at two (2) monthly intervals until sold.   in the event the property is not sold by private treaty pursuant to the above provisions or on or before three (3) calendar months from the date it is first listed, then vendor shall do all acts and sign all documents as are necessary to sell the property by auction and the following shall apply: (i) the property shall be listed with the agent appointed under order 27 (hereinafter called “the property auctioneer”) for sale by auction within a further two (2) months. (ii) the vendor shall execute all documents requested by the property auctioneer for sale of the property by auction. (iii) the vendor shall determine the property reserve price in consultation with the property auctioneer. (iv) the vendor shall pay to the property auctioneer any sums requested for advertising or auction expenses. (v) the vendor shall give such instructions as are necessary to the solicitor appointed under order 27(a) to prepare a contract of sale and provide it to the property auctioneer prior to the auction, no later than the date sought by the property auctioneer. (vi) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor. (h) in the event the property is not sold at the auction pursuant to order 27(g) (and the sub-paragraphs) or within fourteen (14) days after the date of the auction by further negotiation, then the vendor shall cause a further auction of the property to be held within two (2) months after the date of the first auction and at two (2) monthly intervals until sold.   the property shall be listed with the agent appointed under order 27 (hereinafter called “the property auctioneer”) for sale by auction within a further two (2) months. (ii) the vendor shall execute all documents requested by the property auctioneer for sale of the property by auction. (iii) the vendor shall determine the property reserve price in consultation with the property auctioneer. (iv) the vendor shall pay to the property auctioneer any sums requested for advertising or auction expenses. (v) the vendor shall give such instructions as are necessary to the solicitor appointed under order 27(a) to prepare a contract of sale and provide it to the property auctioneer prior to the auction, no later than the date sought by the property auctioneer. (vi) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor.  ) the vendor shall execute all documents requested by the property auctioneer for sale of the property by auction. (iii) the vendor shall determine the property reserve price in consultation with the property auctioneer. (iv) the vendor shall pay to the property auctioneer any sums requested for advertising or auction expenses. (v) the vendor shall give such instructions as are necessary to the solicitor appointed under order 27(a) to prepare a contract of sale and provide it to the property auctioneer prior to the auction, no later than the date sought by the property auctioneer. (vi) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor.  i) the vendor shall determine the property reserve price in consultation with the property auctioneer. (iv) the vendor shall pay to the property auctioneer any sums requested for advertising or auction expenses. (v) the vendor shall give such instructions as are necessary to the solicitor appointed under order 27(a) to prepare a contract of sale and provide it to the property auctioneer prior to the auction, no later than the date sought by the property auctioneer. (vi) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor.  ) the vendor shall pay to the property auctioneer any sums requested for advertising or auction expenses. (v) the vendor shall give such instructions as are necessary to the solicitor appointed under order 27(a) to prepare a contract of sale and provide it to the property auctioneer prior to the auction, no later than the date sought by the property auctioneer. (vi) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor.   the vendor shall give such instructions as are necessary to the solicitor appointed under order 27(a) to prepare a contract of sale and provide it to the property auctioneer prior to the auction, no later than the date sought by the property auctioneer. (vi) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor.  ) the vendor is to co-operate in every way with the property auctioneer in relation to the sale by auction including allowing inspection of the property at all times reasonably requested by the property auctioneer. (vii) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor.  i) the vendor shall attend at the auction and negotiate with the highest bidder in the event of the reserve price not being reached. (viii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor.  ii) the vendor shall agree to a sale price of the property being any amount in excess of the reserve price but in the event of the reserve price not being reached, any offer received after the auction to buy the property at a price that is at least 90% of the reserve price shall be accepted by the vendor.   in the event the property is not sold at the auction pursuant to order 27(g) (and the sub-paragraphs) or within fourteen (14) days after the date of the auction by further negotiation, then the vendor shall cause a further auction of the property to be held within two (2) months after the date of the first auction and at two (2) monthly intervals until sold.
it is noted that publication of this judgment by this court under the pseudonym wu & leong has been approved pursuant to s 121(9)(g) of the family law act 1975 (cth).
reasons for judgment
judge mansfield:
introduction
background
1989
husband immigrated to australia
early 1998
parties met in country k
late 1998
parties became engaged in country k
1999
parties married in country k
wife moved to australia
parties purchased property in suburb m funded by mortgage, joint savings and a small loan from husband’s friend
2001
parties purchased property in suburb l funded by mortgage, joint savings and equity in the suburb m property
2003
husband obtained employment in city n. wife stayed in suburb m to prepare for birth of child
x born
late 2003
husband obtained full time employment (commencement of super fund h entitlements)
wife and child move to suburb d to join husband
suburb m property rented. suburb d property purchased.
august 2004
parties separate. wife and child move to rented accommodation in sydney
early 2005
parties travel together to usa for husband’s family to meet child
late 2005
husband borrows $100,000 secured against suburb m and suburb d properties
january 2006
husband transfers $60,000 out of a joint account
2007
suburb l property sold. husband receives net proceeds of $119,977
march 2008
parties reconcile and wife and child return to live in suburb d property
sometime in 2008
husband says he lost around $150,000 on stock market
2009
suburb m property sold, proceeds applied to suburb d mortgage
late 2009
family travels to country k
2010
husband opens new line of credit and purchases suburb f property in sole name
late 2010 - early 2011
wife and child travel to country k
2011
commencement of escalation of conflict
suburb b property purchased as tenants in common as to husband 90 / wife 10 funded by mortgage and equity in the suburb d property
mid-2011
husband, wife and child move from suburb d to the suburb b property.
sometime in 2011
the husband establishes the smsf (leong family super)
early 2012
2012
husband charged with assaulting child. wife obtains fvo. husband moves out of suburb b.
29 november 2012
parties separate on a final basis (x 9 years old)
february 2013
husband lodged an objection to child support assessment
2013
husband pleaded guilty and convicted
august 2013
wife receives child support for the first time by way of csa automatic deduction
late 2013
wife and child move out of suburb b into rented accommodation.
november 2013
wife commences parenting and property proceedings
wife registers caveat over the suburb f property
westpac took possession of suburb b property. husband managed to retain it.
early 2014
husband commences living in suburb b property (vacant since late 2013)
2014
fvo extended for 2 years
husband applies for fvo against wife
husband moves out of suburb d and into the suburb b property
husband’s fvo application dismissed
november 2019
final parenting and property orders made in absence of the husband
january 2020
husband’s application to re-open proceedings heard and dismissed
mid-2020
wife stops working due to ill health
june 2021
husband’s appeal of jan 2020 decision upheld.
2021
x turns 18
august 2021
orders made by consent for discharge of nov 2019 and for re-hearing
june 2022
matter listed for final hearing commencing 31 oct 2022.
august 2022
order pursuant to s 102na that husband is prohibited from cross-examining the wife personally
september 2022
husband’s application to adjourn final hearing dismissed
the j corporation approved the husband’s application for invalidity retirement
31 october 2022
final hearing commenced
orders sought
the husband’s position  there be a division of the property as to 80 / 20 per cent in favour of the husband, (b) the wife obtain the suburb f property, (c) the husband obtain the suburb b and the suburb d properties, (d) any capital gains tax liability be shared, (e) the parties each retain their own superannuation entitlements.   the wife obtain the suburb f property, (c) the husband obtain the suburb b and the suburb d properties, (d) any capital gains tax liability be shared, (e) the parties each retain their own superannuation entitlements.   the husband obtain the suburb b and the suburb d properties, (d) any capital gains tax liability be shared, (e) the parties each retain their own superannuation entitlements.   any capital gains tax liability be shared, (e) the parties each retain their own superannuation entitlements.   the parties each retain their own superannuation entitlements.
the wife’s position  the husband pay to her $524,435, (b) the wife obtain the suburb d and suburb f properties, (c) the husband retain the suburb b property, (d) there be a splitting order as to the husband’s super fund h entitlements using a base amount of $227,606. (e) there be splitting orders as to 56 per cent of the husband’s other superannuation entitlements.   the wife obtain the suburb d and suburb f properties, (c) the husband retain the suburb b property, (d) there be a splitting order as to the husband’s super fund h entitlements using a base amount of $227,606. (e) there be splitting orders as to 56 per cent of the husband’s other superannuation entitlements.   the husband retain the suburb b property, (d) there be a splitting order as to the husband’s super fund h entitlements using a base amount of $227,606. (e) there be splitting orders as to 56 per cent of the husband’s other superannuation entitlements.   there be a splitting order as to the husband’s super fund h entitlements using a base amount of $227,606. (e) there be splitting orders as to 56 per cent of the husband’s other superannuation entitlements.   there be splitting orders as to 56 per cent of the husband’s other superannuation entitlements.   there be a division of the property as to 65 / 35 per cent in favour of the wife, (b) the wife obtain the suburb d and suburb f properties, (c) the husband retain the suburb b property, (d) the husband is to pay to the wife such amount as to effect the 65 / 35 division in cash, (e) if the husband defaults, there be splitting order as to the husband’s super fund h entitlements using an equivalent base amount, (f) the parties otherwise retain all of their interests in their superannuation entitlements.   the wife obtain the suburb d and suburb f properties, (c) the husband retain the suburb b property, (d) the husband is to pay to the wife such amount as to effect the 65 / 35 division in cash, (e) if the husband defaults, there be splitting order as to the husband’s super fund h entitlements using an equivalent base amount, (f) the parties otherwise retain all of their interests in their superannuation entitlements.   the husband retain the suburb b property, (d) the husband is to pay to the wife such amount as to effect the 65 / 35 division in cash, (e) if the husband defaults, there be splitting order as to the husband’s super fund h entitlements using an equivalent base amount, (f) the parties otherwise retain all of their interests in their superannuation entitlements.   the husband is to pay to the wife such amount as to effect the 65 / 35 division in cash, (e) if the husband defaults, there be splitting order as to the husband’s super fund h entitlements using an equivalent base amount, (f) the parties otherwise retain all of their interests in their superannuation entitlements.   if the husband defaults, there be splitting order as to the husband’s super fund h entitlements using an equivalent base amount, (f) the parties otherwise retain all of their interests in their superannuation entitlements.   the parties otherwise retain all of their interests in their superannuation entitlements.
issues  whether or not to include the addbacks contended for by the wife in the otherwise agreed final balance sheet, (b) assessment of contributions including consideration of family violence, (c) assessment of section 75(2) factors, (d) how to account for potential capital gains tax implications consequential to final orders, (e) the treatment of the husband’s interests in super fund h which is in the payment phase, (f) crafting of orders to retain a just and equitable result whilst finally determining the financial relationship between the parties.   assessment of contributions including consideration of family violence, (c) assessment of section 75(2) factors, (d) how to account for potential capital gains tax implications consequential to final orders, (e) the treatment of the husband’s interests in super fund h which is in the payment phase, (f) crafting of orders to retain a just and equitable result whilst finally determining the financial relationship between the parties.   assessment of section 75(2) factors, (d) how to account for potential capital gains tax implications consequential to final orders, (e) the treatment of the husband’s interests in super fund h which is in the payment phase, (f) crafting of orders to retain a just and equitable result whilst finally determining the financial relationship between the parties.   how to account for potential capital gains tax implications consequential to final orders, (e) the treatment of the husband’s interests in super fund h which is in the payment phase, (f) crafting of orders to retain a just and equitable result whilst finally determining the financial relationship between the parties.   the treatment of the husband’s interests in super fund h which is in the payment phase, (f) crafting of orders to retain a just and equitable result whilst finally determining the financial relationship between the parties.   crafting of orders to retain a just and equitable result whilst finally determining the financial relationship between the parties.
the hearing
regarding the husband’s approach generally  he has done all that could be expected and more of a husband and a father and is without fault, (b) the wife has unreasonably shunned him, taken advantage of him, made false allegations against him and subsequently alienated him from his daughter, (c) the wife ought to be penalised and he ought to be rewarded for behaviour, attitudes and conduct during the relationship, post separation and during the course of these proceedings.   the wife has unreasonably shunned him, taken advantage of him, made false allegations against him and subsequently alienated him from his daughter, (c) the wife ought to be penalised and he ought to be rewarded for behaviour, attitudes and conduct during the relationship, post separation and during the course of these proceedings.   the wife ought to be penalised and he ought to be rewarded for behaviour, attitudes and conduct during the relationship, post separation and during the course of these proceedings.
regarding the wife’s approach generally and family violence  the wife deposes that in september 2003 she did not agree to purchase the suburb d property but the husband forced her to sign the documents. no particulars are provided. (b) the wife describes an ongoing period of abuse and threats leading up to an interim family violence order made in 2004. the wife deposes that pressure was building because there was no money to buy groceries and nappies. she used to prepare both of their tax returns but became too occupied with house chores and the baby to do the husband’s tax return despite them both knowing that he was due to receive a significant return on account of losses incurred from an investment property. she deposed the husband would rather watch tv than do his tax return and instead repeatedly and forcibly attempted to have the wife sign documents to instead borrow money. (c) the wife deposes that she did not know until after separation in 2012 that the documents she and the husband co-signed and witnessed by a shop-assistant in 2010 were two credit contracts when the husband had told her that it was “rearrangement for the loan to make it easier to manage.” (d) the wife complains about the husband borrowing money to fund overseas trips for himself and his parents as though that is not an expense of the marriage and is something that he alone should somehow have paid for.   the wife describes an ongoing period of abuse and threats leading up to an interim family violence order made in 2004. the wife deposes that pressure was building because there was no money to buy groceries and nappies. she used to prepare both of their tax returns but became too occupied with house chores and the baby to do the husband’s tax return despite them both knowing that he was due to receive a significant return on account of losses incurred from an investment property. she deposed the husband would rather watch tv than do his tax return and instead repeatedly and forcibly attempted to have the wife sign documents to instead borrow money. (c) the wife deposes that she did not know until after separation in 2012 that the documents she and the husband co-signed and witnessed by a shop-assistant in 2010 were two credit contracts when the husband had told her that it was “rearrangement for the loan to make it easier to manage.” (d) the wife complains about the husband borrowing money to fund overseas trips for himself and his parents as though that is not an expense of the marriage and is something that he alone should somehow have paid for.   the wife deposes that she did not know until after separation in 2012 that the documents she and the husband co-signed and witnessed by a shop-assistant in 2010 were two credit contracts when the husband had told her that it was “rearrangement for the loan to make it easier to manage.” (d) the wife complains about the husband borrowing money to fund overseas trips for himself and his parents as though that is not an expense of the marriage and is something that he alone should somehow have paid for.   the wife complains about the husband borrowing money to fund overseas trips for himself and his parents as though that is not an expense of the marriage and is something that he alone should somehow have paid for.   had a significant adverse impact on that party’s contributions to the marriage or (b) to have made that party’s contributions significantly more arduous that they ought to have been.   to have made that party’s contributions significantly more arduous that they ought to have been.
legal principles  in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate: (a) in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them--altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property, or
... (b) an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (c) an order requiring: (i) either or both of the parties to the marriage, or  an order for a settlement of property in substitution for any interest in the property, and (c) an order requiring:   an order requiring:
... (ii) to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the marriage or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines.  ) to make, for the benefit of either or both of the parties to the marriage or a child of the marriage, such settlement or transfer of property as the court determines.   the court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court shall take into account: (a) the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last-mentioned property, whether or not that last-mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and (f) any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any other order made under this act affecting a party to the marriage or a child of the marriage, and (g) any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   any child support under the child support (assessment) act 1989 that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the marriage.   identify and determine the value of the asset pool of the parties as at the date of the hearing (this necessarily involves identifying both the assets and liabilities), (b) identify and assess each of the parties financial and other contributions up until the date of the hearing (this can include the financial contributions made before, during and after the marriage), (c) assess how future and other events may have a financial impact on either of the parties, such as their age and state of health and their income and property or financial resources (known as the section 75(2) factors), and (d) step back and examine this formula-based reasoning against the history of the marriage, intangible considerations and other contingencies so as to consider whether the outcome represents a just and equitable result.   identify and assess each of the parties financial and other contributions up until the date of the hearing (this can include the financial contributions made before, during and after the marriage), (c) assess how future and other events may have a financial impact on either of the parties, such as their age and state of health and their income and property or financial resources (known as the section 75(2) factors), and (d) step back and examine this formula-based reasoning against the history of the marriage, intangible considerations and other contingencies so as to consider whether the outcome represents a just and equitable result.   assess how future and other events may have a financial impact on either of the parties, such as their age and state of health and their income and property or financial resources (known as the section 75(2) factors), and (d) step back and examine this formula-based reasoning against the history of the marriage, intangible considerations and other contingencies so as to consider whether the outcome represents a just and equitable result.   step back and examine this formula-based reasoning against the history of the marriage, intangible considerations and other contingencies so as to consider whether the outcome represents a just and equitable result.
is it just and equitable to make a property adjustment?
superannuation
the balance sheet
the assets and liabilities  suburb d property – joint tenants or tenants in common as to equal shares, (b) suburb f property – sole title to the husband, (c) suburb b property – tenants in common as to 90% to the husband and 10% to the wife.   suburb f property – sole title to the husband, (c) suburb b property – tenants in common as to 90% to the husband and 10% to the wife.   suburb b property – tenants in common as to 90% to the husband and 10% to the wife.
addbacks  where one of the parties has embarked upon a course of conduct designed to reduce or minimise the effective value or worth of matrimonial assets, or (b) where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.   where one of the parties has acted recklessly, negligently or wantonly with matrimonial assets, the overall effect of which has reduced or minimised their value.   the husband admits to unilaterally dealing with matrimonial assets of $199,977, $60,000 and $100,000 in 2007, 2006 and 2005 respectively. (b) the wife has been unable to establish what in fact happened to those funds, by subpoena or otherwise, despite being aware of them for at least several years. (c) the husband admits to ‘losing’ about $150,000 of invested money in or about 2008. (d) i have had regard to the circumstances that transactions of this nature and age would ordinarily have great difficulty being recognised as notional assets that ought to be added back to the balance sheet. however, the nature and antiquity of these transactions relative to both the date of trial and also the date of separation is offset by the evidence in this case that at times the parties operated independently of each other and the wife was not involved in or aware of these transactions until after final separation. (e) i have had regard to the circumstances that losses attributable to investment of matrimonial property during the relationship would ordinarily have great difficulty being recognised as notional assets that ought to be added back to the balance sheet. however, after being satisfied that the husband caused those specific amounts to be removed from the pool, the husband has failed to satisfy me on the balance of probabilities as to what happened to those amounts. (f) i find it incredulous that the husband was unable to produce any documentation corroborating his evidence in circumstances where the husband has demonstrated in other areas of his evidence an understanding and ability to obtain and disclose relevant evidence despite its antiquity, and, the nature of the transactions he describes would have yielded abundant documentation. (g) i am satisfied that the husband’s non-disclosure is deliberate and i should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the wife on this issue.   the wife has been unable to establish what in fact happened to those funds, by subpoena or otherwise, despite being aware of them for at least several years. (c) the husband admits to ‘losing’ about $150,000 of invested money in or about 2008. (d) i have had regard to the circumstances that transactions of this nature and age would ordinarily have great difficulty being recognised as notional assets that ought to be added back to the balance sheet. however, the nature and antiquity of these transactions relative to both the date of trial and also the date of separation is offset by the evidence in this case that at times the parties operated independently of each other and the wife was not involved in or aware of these transactions until after final separation. (e) i have had regard to the circumstances that losses attributable to investment of matrimonial property during the relationship would ordinarily have great difficulty being recognised as notional assets that ought to be added back to the balance sheet. however, after being satisfied that the husband caused those specific amounts to be removed from the pool, the husband has failed to satisfy me on the balance of probabilities as to what happened to those amounts. (f) i find it incredulous that the husband was unable to produce any documentation corroborating his evidence in circumstances where the husband has demonstrated in other areas of his evidence an understanding and ability to obtain and disclose relevant evidence despite its antiquity, and, the nature of the transactions he describes would have yielded abundant documentation. (g) i am satisfied that the husband’s non-disclosure is deliberate and i should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the wife on this issue.   the husband admits to ‘losing’ about $150,000 of invested money in or about 2008. (d) i have had regard to the circumstances that transactions of this nature and age would ordinarily have great difficulty being recognised as notional assets that ought to be added back to the balance sheet. however, the nature and antiquity of these transactions relative to both the date of trial and also the date of separation is offset by the evidence in this case that at times the parties operated independently of each other and the wife was not involved in or aware of these transactions until after final separation. (e) i have had regard to the circumstances that losses attributable to investment of matrimonial property during the relationship would ordinarily have great difficulty being recognised as notional assets that ought to be added back to the balance sheet. however, after being satisfied that the husband caused those specific amounts to be removed from the pool, the husband has failed to satisfy me on the balance of probabilities as to what happened to those amounts. (f) i find it incredulous that the husband was unable to produce any documentation corroborating his evidence in circumstances where the husband has demonstrated in other areas of his evidence an understanding and ability to obtain and disclose relevant evidence despite its antiquity, and, the nature of the transactions he describes would have yielded abundant documentation. (g) i am satisfied that the husband’s non-disclosure is deliberate and i should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the wife on this issue.   i have had regard to the circumstances that transactions of this nature and age would ordinarily have great difficulty being recognised as notional assets that ought to be added back to the balance sheet. however, the nature and antiquity of these transactions relative to both the date of trial and also the date of separation is offset by the evidence in this case that at times the parties operated independently of each other and the wife was not involved in or aware of these transactions until after final separation. (e) i have had regard to the circumstances that losses attributable to investment of matrimonial property during the relationship would ordinarily have great difficulty being recognised as notional assets that ought to be added back to the balance sheet. however, after being satisfied that the husband caused those specific amounts to be removed from the pool, the husband has failed to satisfy me on the balance of probabilities as to what happened to those amounts. (f) i find it incredulous that the husband was unable to produce any documentation corroborating his evidence in circumstances where the husband has demonstrated in other areas of his evidence an understanding and ability to obtain and disclose relevant evidence despite its antiquity, and, the nature of the transactions he describes would have yielded abundant documentation. (g) i am satisfied that the husband’s non-disclosure is deliberate and i should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the wife on this issue.   i have had regard to the circumstances that losses attributable to investment of matrimonial property during the relationship would ordinarily have great difficulty being recognised as notional assets that ought to be added back to the balance sheet. however, after being satisfied that the husband caused those specific amounts to be removed from the pool, the husband has failed to satisfy me on the balance of probabilities as to what happened to those amounts. (f) i find it incredulous that the husband was unable to produce any documentation corroborating his evidence in circumstances where the husband has demonstrated in other areas of his evidence an understanding and ability to obtain and disclose relevant evidence despite its antiquity, and, the nature of the transactions he describes would have yielded abundant documentation. (g) i am satisfied that the husband’s non-disclosure is deliberate and i should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the wife on this issue.   i find it incredulous that the husband was unable to produce any documentation corroborating his evidence in circumstances where the husband has demonstrated in other areas of his evidence an understanding and ability to obtain and disclose relevant evidence despite its antiquity, and, the nature of the transactions he describes would have yielded abundant documentation. (g) i am satisfied that the husband’s non-disclosure is deliberate and i should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the wife on this issue.   i am satisfied that the husband’s non-disclosure is deliberate and i should not be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the wife on this issue.
the husband’s interests in super fund h
other superannuation interests
final balance sheet
ownership
value
assets
suburb f property
h
800,000
suburb d property
j
580,000
suburb b property
90h/10w
790,000
total assets
2,170,000
addbacks
150,000
liabilities
suburb f mortgage
298,980
suburb d mortgage
242,677
suburb b mortgage
368,043
total liabilities
909,700
net non-superannuation
1,410,300
superannuation
super fund h
-
super fund r
42,550
mr leong family smsf
43,021
super fund s
w
122,904
total superannuation
208,475
combined total
1,618,775
contributions
initial contributions
contributions during the relationship
post separation contributions  $129,946 was transferred to x after she turned 18 and i disregard this amount. (b) the wife deposes that she has spent “around $120k in legal fees” and i disregard that amount.   the wife deposes that she has spent “around $120k in legal fees” and i disregard that amount.
overall assessment of contributions
relevant section 75(2) factors pursuant to section 79(e)
justice & equity
the orders
husband
wife
1,380,000
541,657
cash adjustment
133,193
-133,193
705,150
50%
super fund h
other superannuation interests
leong family smsf
85,571
41%
59%
790,721
828,054
49%
51%
associate: dated: 27 april 2023
dated: 27 april 2023