last updated: 19 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
gamber & landy [2023] fedcfamc2f 743
orders
the court orders that:
the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
in mid-january 2021, with still no response from either icls, out of total frustration that this was not going to be complied with, i informed the centre that it appeared that [ms landy] was not going to comply so our spot should be given to someone else.
you won't get anything from the asset split and you will not see the kids. we will be supporting [ms landy] and we will give her as much money as she needs to fight you.
after our final separation in 2015, i realised i had a problem with alcohol and how it made be behave. i attended counselling at [bb centre] with counsellor [mr cc] for six sessions between 17 september 2015 and 4 december 2015.
there are still psychosocial issues that [mr gamber] faces (currently now more related to custody of his children). however, his condition is stable and has been since late last year.
since [ms landy] has already convinced the children that i'm a crazy cunt, what's the point in stopping now?
and annexes a copy of the said email to the affidavit. she says that on 5 january 2023, the father sent a phone text message in words to the effect of:
she says that on 5 january 2023, the father sent a phone text message in words to the effect of:
morning, [x] and [y]. just thinking of you on this anniversary. love you lots xoxo.
and another quote:
it was eight years this morning my life went from a misery to really happy.
and also:
doesn't matter. just when i stopped being abused and started to feel happy like i once was.
5 january, of course, is the prime date given for the separation of the parties.   stated that she stopped speaking with her father after a telephone call in 2020 when he told them that he was hurt and they were not worth talking to because they were so happy living with a woman who had ruined their lives, namely, their mother. [y] stated that she felt sad and angry toward her father for making that comment about her mother. she became quite distressed as she talked about her father's attitude. she said that she felt hurt at the time as she had been trying to be happy for so long, and as her father he should be wanting the best for her. she said that she does not want to be around someone who made her feel bad for the way she felt. [x] stated that she blamed herself for her parents' separation at one time.   reported that she has some good memories of being with her father, that he was a fun dad who tried to make time for them. she said, "he was a good dad but not a good person". she said that he was not violent, and although he used physical discipline when they were young, it was not excessive. however, she said that she understands he has been violent in other contexts. she then referred to him destroying their kitchen with a sledgehammer because he was angry. she said she has not seen her father since she was in year 5 "and her life has been easier not seeing him". she said that her father continuously made snide remarks about her mother which made her feel uncomfortable. she also asserted that the rules changed from house to house. she finds it easier to be in one house where there is only one set of rules.   stated she currently does not know where her father is and she is not interested in having contact with him. [x] said she cannot see any future or possibility of repairing her relationship with her father. she said that she can't look passed what he has done, namely, destroy the kitchen, blaming everything on their mother, making snide remarks and fighting with her uncle.
she stated her mother is a good mother and that she is lucky to have such a good parent. she referred to her mother helping her develop better organisational skills. she nominated her mother as friend and friends as her go-to people and people who give her the best hugs. she said she is currently in a good space, did not want anything to jeopardise that. she said she no longer sees a counsellor and is not on any medication.
she would like to communicate the message to the court that she currently does not want to see her father unless she chooses to. she stated she does not expect anything from her father, such as presents. she said that at some time in the future she may resume a relationship with her father but she would like to determine when that time might be. she stated that she does not see that there would be any obstacles to her seeing her father if that is what she chooses.
during the interview her presentation was as flat in her effect, short and impatient, not wishing to be interviewed. she mumbled at various points through the interview and said she did not want to be there. [y] said she used to live with her father on a week about basis, that her father was fun to be around, but since he has done what he has done, he has been a changed person. [y] stated she did not think her father was all that able to look after them.   stated that she had some unpleasant interactions with her father on the telephone. she said that he has told her and [x] that he did not love them because they saw and spoke with their paternal family and not with him. [y] stated that her father has been gaslighting on the phone. [y] stated that she stopped talking to her father at the time but then resumed several months later.   said that her father has been telling her that his situation is not his fault, and that it is practically her mother's fault. she stated that she believes her father is lying to her and defends himself trying to convince her that he is a good guy. [y] stated that she is not afraid of either parent. [y] seemed ambivalent about her wishes to see her father. she said that there are times when she thinks she would like to see him every fortnight, but then there are times when she thinks she would like to choose when she sees him. she said she would prefer to spend time with her father alone because her mother and [x] make things worse, although she was unable to articulate in what way that was the case. she said she would probably feel annoyed if she did not get to see her father.
the children expressed different views about spending time with their father. [x] indicated she does not currently want her living arrangements to change. she indicated she would like to pause contact with the father electronically and in person, in the knowledge that she could reconnect with him if and when she was ready. her position is not atypical of children who move into their adolescent years and find that they can no longer traverse the delicate terrain of moving between two warring parents, and that it is much more manageable for them to live in the care of one parent and park the relationship with the other to some future date. [y] seemed to be more ambivalent in respect of her views to have a relationship with her father. she appears to have felt disappointed with their father when there have been interruptions in their contact, and sought to resume communication after the interruption in 2020. she indicated she would like to have contact with him electronically and face to face, perhaps fortnightly. she also indicated that she believes she could manage to do that individually, even though her sister may think she should also be present.
the children at the time of their interviews were 14 years and 11 years of age, and that given their ages, some weight needs to be accorded to their views.   in particular displayed considerable maturity and insight in her disclosures in respect of her feelings and thoughts. in the case of [y], her living arrangements will need to juxtapose her views alongside safety concerns.   gamber] seems to have minimised the seriousness of his actions in his conversations with the children, and possibly has limited insight into how his behaviour extrapolates to parenting relationships. if the children reach the point where they wish to delve further into what has occurred with their father - and there she is referring to the [mid] 2019 criminal matter - that may best be processed in a therapeutic environment.
the children seem to have formed the belief that their father has been unreliable and undermining of their mother, and they have become progressively more disgruntled with the way he has interacted with them and his lack of insight into the impact of his behaviour, and some of his choices, such as suspending telephone contact and not following through on visits at the contact centre, would have contributed to the children feeling their father has abandoned them. it also provides the court with little material with which to move forward in making orders that are child-focused and ensure the children's safety.
the capacity of the father to self-regulate seems to have been compromised when he has been under the influence of alcohol. june 2019 certainly seems to bear that out. the court would need to have the assurance that if either of the children was to spend time with their father, he would need to provide evidence that he has not been consuming alcohol.
...that [x] live with her mother and spend time with her father in accordance with her wishes.
...that [y] spend time with her father initially supervised, and that progress to unsupervised time, contingent on the feedback from the contact supervision service. if the time between [y] and the father was to progress to unsupervised time, it would be recommended it be no longer than alternate weekends.
if the court considers that the father's alcohol use poses a risk to the children, orders may need to be put in place in relation to his consumption of alcohol if either child is in his care.
...that the parties do not discuss their adult issues in the presence of the children or expose them to conversations which denigrate the other or significant others.
a discretionary judgment concerning parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions, and intuition.
associate: dated: 3 may 2023
dated: 3 may 2023