last updated: 21 june 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
umaru & maletta (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 478
orders
the court orders by consent that:
and the court orders that:
parental responsibility  x (born in 2012) (‘x’), and (b) y (born in 2014) (‘y’).   y (born in 2014) (‘y’).  e children”)
and the court orders by consent that:
living arrangements
week 1  commencing 11 may 2023, from after school (or 5pm if not s school day) on thursday until before school (or 9am if not s school day) on the following monday and each alternate thursday thereafter at those times,
week 2  commencing 4 may 2023, from after school (or 5pm if not s school day) on thursday until after school (or 5pm if not s school day) until before school (or 9am if not s school day) on the following friday and each alternate thursday thereafter at those times, (c) at any other times as agreed between the parties in writing.   at any other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
long summer holidays  long summer school holidays (with changeovers to occur at 5pm): (i) in odd-numbered years commencing december 2023/january 2024, the first half with the father and the second half with the mother. (ii) in even-numbered years commencing december 2024/january 2025, the first half with the mother and the second half with the father, and   in odd-numbered years commencing december 2023/january 2024, the first half with the father and the second half with the mother. (ii) in even-numbered years commencing december 2024/january 2025, the first half with the mother and the second half with the father, and  ) in even-numbered years commencing december 2024/january 2025, the first half with the mother and the second half with the father, and
school term holidays  term 1 holidays: the children shall be with the mother for the whole of the term 1 school holidays in odd numbered years, and with the father in even numbered years.   term 2 holidays: on a week-about basis, with the father to have the first week in odd-numbered years and with the mother in even-numbered years, with changeovers to occur at 5pm, (d) term 3 holidays: on a week-about basis, with the mother to have the first week in odd-numbered years and with the father in even-numbered years, with changeovers to occur at 5pm,   term 3 holidays: on a week-about basis, with the mother to have the first week in odd-numbered years and with the father in even-numbered years, with changeovers to occur at 5pm,
and the court orders by consent that:
special days  on father’s day from 10:00am until 6:00pm. (b) on the father’s and children’s birthdays, if s school day, from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, and if not s school day from 10:00am until 6:00pm.   on the father’s and children’s birthdays, if s school day, from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, and if not s school day from 10:00am until 6:00pm.   on mother’s day from 10:00am until 6:00pm. (b) on the mother’s and children’s birthdays, if s school day, from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, and if not s school day from 10:00am until 6:00pm.   on the mother’s and children’s birthdays, if s school day, from the conclusion of school until 7:30pm, and if not s school day from 10:00am until 6:00pm.   from 4pm on christmas eve until 4pm on christmas day in 2022, and each alternate year, and from 4pm on christmas day until 4pm on boxing day in 2023, and each alternate year.   from 4pm on christmas day until 4pm on boxing day in 2022, and each alternate year, and from 4pm on christmas eve until 4pm on christmas day in 2023, and each alternate year.   attend any school function or extracurricular activities which parents usually attend – but only extracurricular activity games or events (but not merely training) when the children are with the other parent, (b) receive documents, notices and information from the children’s schools or sporting/extracurricular activity organisations that parents usually receive, (c) receive any information from the children’s schools and medical professionals which parents usually receive, (d) communicate with each other regarding parenting issues – including via the weparent app.   receive documents, notices and information from the children’s schools or sporting/extracurricular activity organisations that parents usually receive, (c) receive any information from the children’s schools and medical professionals which parents usually receive, (d) communicate with each other regarding parenting issues – including via the weparent app.   receive any information from the children’s schools and medical professionals which parents usually receive, (d) communicate with each other regarding parenting issues – including via the weparent app.   communicate with each other regarding parenting issues – including via the weparent app.
travel & passports
communication  on sundays and wednesday each week from 6:30pm to 7:00pm victorian time, and (b) when reasonably requested by the children,   when reasonably requested by the children,
with the children to be given privacy during such calls.  within 7 days from the date of these orders, do all acts and things necessary to establish an account with the communication application weparent, and (b) communicate about parenting matters via the communication application weparent, unless in the event of an emergency.   communicate about parenting matters via the communication application weparent, unless in the event of an emergency.   significant medical issues concerning the children, or either of them, and authorise each other to communicate with the children’s treating health professionals regarding same, and   save in emergency, changes to their address and contact details no less than 14 days beforehand.
schools  ensure that the children continue to attend e school (f street, suburb g) for the duration of their primary schooling, and (b) do all acts and things necessary to enrol both children at h school (j street, suburb g, victoria) for their secondary schooling, unless otherwise agreed between them in writing, with (c) all usual school-hours school expenses (not after school care) are to be paid for equally by the parties (unless otherwise agreed between them in writing) with the expense of after school care to be at the expense of the parent organising same.   do all acts and things necessary to enrol both children at h school (j street, suburb g, victoria) for their secondary schooling, unless otherwise agreed between them in writing, with (c) all usual school-hours school expenses (not after school care) are to be paid for equally by the parties (unless otherwise agreed between them in writing) with the expense of after school care to be at the expense of the parent organising same.   all usual school-hours school expenses (not after school care) are to be paid for equally by the parties (unless otherwise agreed between them in writing) with the expense of after school care to be at the expense of the parent organising same.
extracurricular activities
medical matters  within 7 days from the date of these orders, the parties attend upon a gp to obtain a referral and discuss mental health care plans, (b) the parties will ensure that both children attend upon the referred psychologist as soon as possible, (c) the parties will ensure that the children continue to attend upon the psychologist for as long as treatment is recommended by the psychologist but not longer than 6 months unless agreed by the parents in writing.   the parties will ensure that both children attend upon the referred psychologist as soon as possible, (c) the parties will ensure that the children continue to attend upon the psychologist for as long as treatment is recommended by the psychologist but not longer than 6 months unless agreed by the parents in writing.   the parties will ensure that the children continue to attend upon the psychologist for as long as treatment is recommended by the psychologist but not longer than 6 months unless agreed by the parents in writing.
injunction  abusing, insulting, rebuking, belittling or otherwise denigrating the other party or their family/friends to or in the presence or hearing of the children or allowing the children to remain in the presence of third parties engaging in such conduct, and (b) discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children or permitting any other person to do so.   discussing these proceedings or the contents of any documents filed in these proceedings to, with or in the presence or hearing of the children or permitting any other person to do so.
parenting coordination  attend on the parenting coordinator: (i) for an intake session within 29 days of the date of these orders, (ii) for 1 session per school term or as otherwise required by the parenting coordinator, and (b) authorise the parenting coordinator to communicate with the children’s psychologist.   for an intake session within 29 days of the date of these orders, (ii) for 1 session per school term or as otherwise required by the parenting coordinator, and  ) for 1 session per school term or as otherwise required by the parenting coordinator, and   authorise the parenting coordinator to communicate with the children’s psychologist.   execution of the standard pc agreement, and (b) remittance of all requisite retainers and deposits,   remittance of all requisite retainers and deposits,
with each party having liberty to apply to the court on the giving of 14 business days’ notice in the event of a failure in the appointment of the parenting coordinator.  a copy of the final parenting orders, (b) copies of all family reports and child impact reports released in the course of this proceeding, and (c) reasons for judgment delivered with these orders.   copies of all family reports and child impact reports released in the course of this proceeding, and (c) reasons for judgment delivered with these orders.   reasons for judgment delivered with these orders.
courses & other orders
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgment
judge o’shannessy
introduction
background
proceedings
the court orders, by consent, that: parenting the mother and father have equal shared parental responsibility for the long term care and welfare of the children, namely:
1.1 [w] born on [date 1], and 1.2 [z] born on [date 2]  e children”) when the children are in the mother’s care, the mother have sole parental responsibility for the day to day care and welfare of the children. when the children are in the father’s care, the father have sole parental responsibility for the day to day care and welfare of the children. the children live with the mother. during the gazetted victorian school terms, the children spend time with the father as follows:
week 1 5.1 each alternate weekend from after school/kindergarten/childcare or 5pm if not s school/kindergarten day on friday until before school/kindergarten/childcare (or 9am if not s school/kindergarten day) tuesday. week 2 5.2 each alternate week on wednesday from after school/kindergarten/childcare (or 5pm if not s school/kindergarten day) until 7.30pm, 5.3 at any other times as agreed between the parties in writing. during the gazetted victorian school holidays, the children spend time with each parent as follows: 6.1 with each parent every alternate week for term 1 of the gazetted victorian school holidays, 6.2 with the mother for all of term 2 of the gazetted victorian school holidays, 6.3 with the father for all of term 3 of the gazetted victorian school holidays, and 6.4 for the first two weeks of term 4 of the gazetted victorian school holidays with the father and the second two weeks of term 4 of the gazetted victorian school holidays with the mother and thereafter to equally split the remainder of the term 4 of the gazetted victorian school holidays with each parent, with the exception of orders 8.4 and 8.5 herein or otherwise as agreed in writing. when the father moves within 15 kilometres of the children’s enrolled school ([e school]), that the children shall spend equal time with each parent (in addition to orders 5 and 6 herein).
... changeover shall take place either at school or kindergarten or child care or at such places as agreed between the parties in writing. within 48 hours of making these orders, [[n]] lawyers shall release the children’s [country] and australian passports to the mother. that the children’s [country] and australian passports be held by the mother at all times, except when it has been agreed for the father to travel with the children overseas in accordance with orders 9 and 10. the mother is to provide the children’s australian passports for travel overseas by no later than 48 hours prior to the travel time. when the father returns from overseas with the children, the father is to return the australian passports to the mother within 24 hours. ... (emphasis added)
the final hearing
documents relied upon
exhibits tendered
exhibit #
description
2 september 2022
a
minutes of matters agreed dated 2 september 2022
c1
google maps printout of directions from q school to e school
15 september 2022
w1
minute of proposed orders sought by the wife marked up with agreed or disagreed
h1
minute of proposed orders sought by the husband
16 september 2022
w2
our family wizard messages
w3
email from 1 july 2022 re: family report
w4
1 july email with attachments (8 pages collectively) – instructions re: family report preparation
w5
photo of invoice from dentist
witnesses
applicable law
standard of proof  in a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the balance of probabilities. (2) without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into account:   the nature of the cause of action or defence, and (b) the nature of the subject-matter of the proceeding, and (c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
credit of parties ] ...in recent years, judges have become more aware of scientific research that has cast doubt on the ability of judges (or anyone else) to tell truth from falsehood accurately on the basis of such appearances. considerations such as these have encouraged judges, both at trial and on appeal, to limit their reliance on the appearances of witnesses and to reason to their conclusions, as far as possible, on the basis of contemporary materials, objectively established facts and the apparent logic of events... [citations omitted]
parenting orders
60ca: child's best interests paramount consideration in making a parenting order
in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order in relation to a child, a court must regard the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration.
... 60cc how a court determines what is in a child's best interests
determining child's best interests (1) subject to subsection (5), in determining what is in the child's best interests, the court must consider the matters set out in subsections (2) and (3). primary considerations (2) the primary considerations are: (a) the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence. (2a) in applying the considerations set out in subsection (2), the court is to give greater weight to the consideration set out in paragraph (2)(b). additional considerations (3) additional considerations are: (a) any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,   the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child's parents, and (b) the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child's maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child's views,  the nature of the relationship of the child with: each of the child's parents, and (ii) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and (iii) to communicate with the child, (ca) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from: (i) either of his or her parents, or (ii) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  ) other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), (c) the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   the extent to which each of the child's parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity: (i) to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and   to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and (ii) to spend time with the child, and  ) to spend time with the child, and  ) the extent to which each of the child's parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent's obligations to maintain the child, (d) the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:   the likely effect of any changes in the child's circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from:  ) any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living, (e) the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,   the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child's right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis,  the capacity of: each of the child's parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs, (g) the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child:  ) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child),   the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child's parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant, (h) if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child:   if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child:  t relevant to this case) (i) the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents, (j) any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family, (k) if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:   if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child's family--any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following:  the nature of the order, (ii) the circumstances in which the order was made, (iii) any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, (iv) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, (v) any other relevant matter, (l) whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  ) any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order,   whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child,  any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant.
... 61da presumption of equal shared parental responsibility when making parenting orders   when making a parenting order in relation to a child, the court must apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child. (2) the presumption does not apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or a person who lives with a parent of the child) has engaged in: (a) abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or (b) family violence. (3) when the court is making an interim order, the presumption applies unless the court considers that it would not be appropriate in the circumstances for the presumption to be applied when making that order. (4) the presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would not be in the best interests of the child for the child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child.   abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was a member of the parent’s family (or that other person’s family), or (b) family violence.   family violence.
... 65daa court to consider child spending equal time or substantial and significant time with each parent in certain circumstances
equal time (1) subject to subsection (6), if a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, the court must: (a) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents. substantial and significant time (2) subject to subsection (6), if: (a) a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (b) consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (c) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents.   a parenting order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, and (b) the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,   the court does not make an order (or include a provision in the order) for the child to spend equal time with each of the parents,
the court must: (c) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents would be in the best interests of the child, and (d) consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   consider whether the child spending substantial and significant time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable, and (e) if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   if it is, consider making an order to provide (or including a provision in the order) for the child to spend substantial and significant time with each of the parents.   for the purposes of subsection (2), a child will be taken to spend substantial and significant time with a parent only if:  the time the child spends with the parent includes both: days that fall on weekends and holidays, and (ii) days that do not fall on weekends or holidays, and (b) the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in: (i) the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in: (i) the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the child’s daily routine, and (ii) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.  ) occasions and events that are of particular significance to the child, and (c) the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   the time the child spends with the parent allows the child to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.   subsection (3) does not limit the other matters to which a court can have regard in determining whether the time a child spends with a parent would be substantial and significant. reasonable practicality (5) in determining for the purposes of subsections (1) and (2) whether it is reasonably practicable for a child to spend equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the child’s parents, the court must have regard to: (a) how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant. consent orders (6) if: (a) the court is considering whether to make a parenting order with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings, and (b) the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,   how far apart the parents live from each other, and (b) the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the parents’ current and future capacity to implement an arrangement for the child spending equal time, or substantial and significant time, with each of the parents, and (c) the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the parents’ current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of that kind, and (d) the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the impact that an arrangement of that kind would have on the child, and (e) such other matters as the court considers relevant.   such other matters as the court considers relevant.   the court is considering whether to make a parenting order with the consent of all the parties to the proceedings, and (b) the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,   the order provides (or is to provide) that a child’s parents are to have equal shared parental responsibility for the child,
the court may, but is not required to, consider the matters referred to in paragraphs (1)(a) to (c) or (if applicable) the matters referred to in paragraphs (2)(c) to (e).  to avoid doubt, subsection (6) does not affect the application of section 60ca in relation to a parenting order.
... 65dac effect of parenting order that provides for shared parental responsibility   this section applies if, under a parenting order: (a) 2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child. (2) the order is taken to require the decision to be made jointly by those persons.   2 or more persons are to share parental responsibility for a child, and (b) the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child.   the exercise of that parental responsibility involves making a decision about a major long‑term issue in relation to the child.
note: subject to any court orders, decisions about issues that are not major long‑term issues are made by the person with whom the child is spending time without a need to consult the other person (see section 65dae).  the order is taken to require each of those persons: (a) to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue. (4) to avoid doubt, this section does not require any other person to establish, before acting on a decision about the child communicated by one of those persons, that the decision has been made jointly.   to consult the other person in relation to the decision to be made about that issue, and (b) to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.   to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about that issue.
some significant events
the interim report and the family report
the interim report: may 2021
... [the mother] raised concerns about the children's emotional well-being in the father's care due to alleged exposure to denigration of her, paternal aggression and anger, and involvement in the parental dispute. [the mother] believes both children need counselling though [the father] has not provided his consent. she said that [w] bites her nails, wet her bed for 4 months after her father repartnered, and still wets her bed occasionally. she believes [w] feels pressured and fears saying something wrong or upsetting her parents. she said [z] is sensitive and emotional and feels unloved if his father becomes angry or ignores him. ... [the father] said he finds the mother's poor punctuality frustrating, but the children did not seem to be perturbed about arriving at school late and the children's overall attendance did not seem to be of concern. the father did acknowledge that the pandemic has been difficult for the mother as the maternal grandmother is unwell and the mother has been unable to return to [country d] to see her, family, or friends. ... whilst the parents alleged denigration and influence by the other parent, these were not found to be significant issues during the current evaluation. however, it is important that the father allows the mother to spend time with the children as she wishes, without criticism, intimidation, or pressure. ... the father presented with positive impression management regarding his abilities as a parent, the children’s level of functioning, the strength of the children ' s relationships with his partner and her children , and how well the children have adjusted to the blending of families and the separation. this may reflect a lack of insight by the father or conscious positive distortion. regardless, the father has dismissed the children’s struggle to adjust to the changes in their lives and lack of stability and consistency in his care, thus has not responded to their need for additional care, consideration, and support. he seems to lack an understanding of attachment processes and the children's need for a stable base, seeming more concerned about equal time, the mother’s punctuality, and the children's unreturned shoes. the mother is more emotionally attuned and responsive to the children's needs. she is aware that [w] is anxious about saying something wrong and upsetting her parents, and that [z] is sensitive to his father's anger, which was apparent during this evaluation but not recognised by the father. [z], in particular, is more closely bonded to his mother. both children prefer greater time with their mother than their father, though [w] was hesitant in saying so. both parents appear to be devoted to the children and capable of meeting their basic and developmental needs. it is important that the children’s secure attachment to their mother is protected and nurtured to ensure the best possible developmental outcomes, but also that the father’s relationship with the children is given adequate opportunity to develop , strengthen, and grow.
the family report
... the father prioritised time with the children by selling [the [suburb o]] and purchased his current five-bedroom home in [[suburb r]], 10 km from the children's primary school. settlement was on 4 august 2021. the father is now able to offer the children stable accommodation after a period of instability. ... during the [first] report evaluation, [the mother] expressed concerns about the father facilitating communication with the children whilst in his care and he indicated that he encourages contact, but the children do not want to communicate with the mother. both parents believe that the other refuses to facilitate communication at the request of the children and the father believes that the mother shuts their communication down, though the parents' concerns were not supported by the children. the father likely distrusts the mother as she previously blocked his calls on her phone as she was feeling harassed. [the mother] is also of the view that the children are too scared to ask the father if they can speak to the mother, yet the father will contact the children incessantly whilst in her care and disrupt her time with the children. she referred to [w] missing 23 calls from the father recently when out and unavailable. [the mother] would like communication to occur at fixed times so that the children are able to contact each parent but are not made to feel harassed, intimidated, or distressed. ... [the mother] continues to feel intimidated, denigrated, controlled, monitored, and attacked by the father about minor issues, such as her punctuality and attendance. [the father] acknowledged that he finds the mother's poor punctuality frustrating. her disorganisation and tardiness also impacted the family report assessments, such that others had to change their plans at short notice to accommodate the mother's lack of planning. whilst the father acknowledged her lateness may be driven by culture, he believes it is disrespectful and inconsiderate of others who are negatively impacted. he said the children's sports teams are let down when the children are late, and the children are made to feel embarrassed or uncomfortable. he said, "it's not that hard to turn up on time". [the mother] said the father has repeatedly breached the full exclusion ivo though she has notified police on one occasion when he came within 5 m of her at [sports] training. he said he lifted his head and was 3 m from her, he froze and stared at her. he was charged with the breach and received a six-month community corrections order without conviction. she claimed that he also said "don't be pathetic" when she videoed him at after-school care and shouted at her when she was handing over [s school] bag with uniform, "if i don't have what i asked you for, [the children] will not come to school on monday. do you understand?" ... [the mother] stated that the father continually makes her feel intimidated by attending the children's activities, training, and after school care during her time with the children. she said she cannot enjoy her time with the children, and the children are exposed to the tension created. she also claimed that he approaches her car when she is inside, opens the car doors and boot, and places items inside, causing her significant distress. he believed he was doing the right thing by chaperoning the children to the car and carrying their items, particularly when it is cold and raining, but said "she jumps up and down" about him approaching the vehicle. ... the father responded well to being told that his presence increases the mother's anxiety, whether justified or not, and therefore the tension to which the children are exposed, thus minimising unnecessary contact and communication is of benefit to the children. the father said he would give her space to sit with the team supporters at [sports] matches during the week in which the children are in her care and discontinue approaching her car. he said he wants the mother to be happy as he believes the children will also benefit from that. [the mother] previously raised concerns about the children's emotional well-being in the father's care due to exposure paternal aggression anger and aggression, and the father denigrating her in their presence, but seemed more concerned about the children's exposure to tension and conflict between the parents on this occasion. whilst she said the father does not have a strong emotional connection with the children, she acknowledged the children have fun with the father. the father acknowledged that the pandemic was difficult for the mother as the maternal grandmother has been unwell and the mother was unable to return to [country d] to see her, but she has returned to [country d] twice this year. the father is very supportive of the mother being able to travel to [country d] once or twice annually and is open to travel outside of the school holidays whilst the children are young. however, he does not want a repeat of the last school holidays whereby the children spent four weeks away from him though they did not travel overseas. he said the entire holiday period was allocated to the mother and the mother tested positive for covid and kept the children with her. the father was disappointed that the mother had not allowed him to collect the children when they tested negative, though he had arranged for the mother to take the children when he tested positive in january. he said the four-week period in which the children did not see him was distressing for the children and not child focused. ... [the mother] presented as naïve, anxious, and lacking in self-esteem and confidence. although child focused and emotionally attuned to the children, her thought patterns were scattered and tangential, as her behaviour was disorganised. she was late and had not arranged a supervisor for the children during her interview, though i advised [her] to do so in advance. the day had to be reorganised to accommodate the mother's lack of planning. ... [the mother] is concerned that [w] is overly considerate, lacks assertiveness, and is being triangulated in the parental dispute by her father, causing her to feel nervous, overwhelmed, and pressured. [the mother] claims that the father lets [w] read all the messages on the parenting app and communicates through [w] when he does not get what he wants from the mother. [the mother] believes [w] does not want to upset her parents and is always worried about each parent being happy. [the mother] raised concerns regarding parent-child communication when the child is in the other parent's care. she is concerned that whilst in their father's care, the children are not given privacy when they communicate with her, they fear asking to call her, and the father refuses to facilitate calls. she claimed he is the background during video calls as the children will look backwards. she reported that the children expressed that they miss her when with the father, but [z] will say "i'll deal with it" and no longer calls or speaks during video calls. [the mother] claimed that [z] stopped calling following an incident in which the father prevented him from contacting the mother when crying and pleading to speak to her. [the mother wants] scheduled phone calls so that the children are not burdened with having to ask to call the other parent and to avoid the father calling the children incessantly and disregarding that they may be busy. [w] and the mother indicated that [w] received 23 missed calls from her father recently. ... [the mother] is concerned about the children's emotional well-being in the father's care and that the father has not provided consent for the children to receive counselling. although she previously raised concerns regarding the father denigrating her in the children's presence and exposing them to aggression and anger, this seemed to be less of a concern during the current evaluation. ... [the father] is a 45-year-old male who initially presented as defensive, dominant, and unwilling to show vulnerability, but this changed significantly as the interview progressed. he appeared far more flexible, open to discussing different viewpoints, and expressed willingness to adapt his own behaviour to reduce the mother's distress and therefore the tension to which the children are exposed. this seemed to be a considerable shift since the previous evaluation. ... [the father] said he was devastated by the assessor's recommendation of a 9:5 arrangement in the previous report though it was not adopted. the assessor explained that his living arrangements were unstable, the children were not comfortable living with his partner and children, and the children have closer emotional connection to the mother. ... [w] indicated that she likes the current time arrangements as each week goes quickly and she has a lot of fun. however, she recently spent an extended period with her mother during the school holidays and missed her father. [w] wants the current time arrangements to remain in place and thought they may have been in place for one or two years. she believes that these arrangements are fair, and she did not like it when she saw her father every second weekend. [w] recalled that there were problems when changeover occurred at [sport] as her parents "don't like each other". she said that they "look at each other like they don't like each other" which makes her feel sad. she said that changeover mostly occurs at school now. [w] said that her parents sit on opposite sides of the sports court during [[z]'s] matches and "it's weird" as her mother sits with the other team. if she goes over to see her father, her mother will say come back. she is aware that her mother is uncomfortable at these games with the father present. [w] said that her mother does not say anything bad about her father, and her father rarely says good or bad things about her mother. however, her father asked why her mother "can't just see [his] messages on [the our family wizard app]? he added, "mum makes everything harder". [w] was asked if she ever felt worried, scared, or uncomfortable with either parent. she said that her mother always allows her to call her father and says that they can call him whenever they want but her father will not stop calling her ipad. [w] said, "if i have to go, i say i will call him back", but if she goes out, she returns to "so many missed messages" from her father. [w] said, "i think he thinks i'm going as i don't want to speak to him, but i truly have to go". [w] said that her father will call her even when he knows that she is already rushing to get ready and will become "really angry" when her mother is late. [w] said that her father will say, that "mummy grew up in [country], but mummy needs to understand that this is australia and there are different rules". [w] said that they sometimes wear shorts in winter, but "get used to it". however, her father will say, "mummy needs to understand it's not [country], it's winter, and it's not hot every day". [w] stated that she has been to [country d] five or six times and stays with her maternal grandmother and sees her aunt and cousins. she said her father does not like [country d] as he says it is "sticky, humid, and dirty", and that "people live in the same houses and sleep in the same bed". [w] indicated that she has her own room at both her parents' houses, sleeps in her own bed, and likes going to [country d]. ... [w] said that she enjoys riding a bike, jumping on the trampoline, and baking with her father. the best thing about her father is that he is funny and makes jokes about everything. the worst thing about her father is the pressure he places on her to call him when at her mother's house. she believes that he thinks that the mother is stopping her from calling him when this is not the case. [w] said that a good memory of time with her father is when they went to the swimming pool and played [a game] whereby, she falls into the pool, and he catches her. however, she said that [z] will blame her when he does something wrong, and her father will yell and smack her. she said she was last smacked by her father two weeks ago and a week before that, but [z] is smacked less. she said her mother used to smack her but does not anymore. [w] said she loves shopping and watching movies with her mother. the best thing about her mother is that she is funny and makes puns with the [language]. the worst thing about her mother is that her mother blames her when [z] does something wrong. if she is in trouble, her mother will yell but then tries to teach her a lesson. she said her father yells more and when he is stressed, he also swears. [w] volunteered that her mother works a lot, including at home, and she would prefer that her mother worked less, so that she attends after school care two days a week rather than monday to thursday when in her mother's care. she said that her father is more active and available to her. ... ... [z] indicated that his father yells a lot and that this makes him scared. ... [z] said that he currently plays [sports]. he said his parents take him to [sports] separately, but his father always attends whereas his mother only attends when he is staying at her house. he likes it best when they are both present. in terms of time arrangements, he said that week about arrangements are pretty good. he does not want arrangements to change as they are "even", have been in place for a long time, and he missed his father when he only saw him every second weekend. he is aware that his father wants the same amount of time as his mother and believes his mother wants what is fair. ... [z] said his mother does not talk about his father, but he does not think that she likes him. he said his father does not talk about his mother much as he does not like her. he said they will walk away from each other when they come into contact, and this makes him feel sad. [z] said that he enjoys doing everything with his mother, but especially hugging, watching movies together, and being tickled by his mother. the best thing about his mum is "everything" and the worst thing is when she gets angry with him as she yells, but "not so much... it's a bit scary, but dad is scarier and yells more often coz i'm a bit naughty". [z] smiled and said that his mother smacks him a lot, but his father will yell and tell him not to misbehave again. [z] said that he enjoys hanging around together, telling jokes, and sharing movie nights with his father. the best thing about his father is when he sleeps with him about twice per week, though he never sleeps with his mother. the worst thing about his father is that he yells a lot and becomes scary. ... after the parents separated, the mother unilaterally decided that the father needed to live within 15 km of the school to support equal time arrangements, but the children should otherwise spend four nights per fortnight with him. time arrangements varied thereafter according to the father's proximity to the school and remote learning during lockdown. as a measure of his devotion to the children, the father sold the farm to relocate closer to the school and satisfy the mother's condition for equal time arrangements. the children felt unsettled by the father's changing living arrangements and having to co reside with his new partner and children, but the father has since bought a large home within 10 km of the children's primary school, and his partner and children live separately. whilst the mother is more emotionally attuned to the children and the children both expressed having a closer connection with her, the father is more available to the children and more capable of supporting the children's engagement in education and extracurricular activities, and ensuring they attend on time. orders for equal time arrangements on a week about basis were made on 11 march 2021. no major concerns have been raised regarding the amount of time the children spend with each parent since, and the father's living arrangements have stabilised, thus it is not in the best interests of the children to vary these arrangements. the children are also seeking that these arrangements remain in place. it is also recommended that equal time arrangements continue throughout the school holidays with flexibility to reschedule time arrangements for extended holidays with the children, so that the mother is able to return to [country] and the children are not subjected to another extended block of time away from a parent unnecessarily. there has been a significant change in the parents' presentation between assessments. the father was rigid, defensive, and domineering during the previous evaluation, and his animosity and resentment towards the mother and determination to establish a blended family clouded his ability to remain child focused and respond appropriately to the children's needs. on this occasion, he presented as the more flexible parent, more willing to compromise and adapt his behaviour to reduce the mother's anxiety and therefore the tension to which the children are exposed. the father shifted his focus from equal time to being involved in all aspects of the children's lives but did not adequately consider the impact of his increased presence on the mother's anxiety levels, or that she would feel intimidated or harassed as a result. on the other hand, the mother has become increasingly inflexible as her anxiety increased. she has made several decisions without consulting the father, such as relocating to the catchment area for the school she prefers. such behaviour is not conducive to establishing positive communication and an effective co-parenting relationship in which both parents' views are valued and considered. a parallel parenting approach is therefore recommended, whereby each parent is responsible for their own time with the children without the other parent's interference, so that the children's exposure to tension between the parents, maternal control, and parental distress is minimised. communication should only relate to health, education, extracurricular activities, and religious and logistical matters in relation to the children with the use of a parenting app. it will be necessary for the father to discontinue attending the children's activities during the mother's time when the mother is present, other than the children's weekend sports matches, to minimise the children's exposure to tension, conflict, and maternal distress. both parents are capable of making long-term decisions in the best interests of the children, thus parental responsibility should be equally shared. however, engagement with a parenting coordinator is recommended once final orders are made to avoid returning to court, and for support when make long-term decisions, such as choosing a high school for the children next year. ... whilst the children's views were not given significant weight due to the children's age and maturity, desire to please both parents, and limited understanding of the dispute and the long-term implications of their proposals, the recommended time arrangements align with their preferences. both children present with anxiety-related issues in the context of their parents' separation and would benefit from engaging with a psychologist. the children have been observed to be closely bonded to both parents and both parents appear to be devoted to the children and capable of meeting their basic and developmental needs. it is important that the mother's close attachment to the children is protected and nurtured, but also that the father is given adequate opportunity to develop and strengthen his connection with the children, and this should be reflected in time arrangements. ... recommendations in the absence of evidence to the contrary, the following recommendations are respectfully made: the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children. the children spend equal time with each parent on a week about basis with changeover commencement of school on fridays (or 9 am on non-school days), continuing during school holidays, with special dates shared. there is flexibility to reschedule time arrangements by mutual agreement in writing to allow for extended holidays. the mother can travel to [country d] with the children for a period of up to 3 weeks, up to twice annually. ... video or telephone communication is scheduled at a mutually agreed time twice per week between the children and parent with whom the children are not spending time, for example, sundays and wednesdays from 6:30 pm until 7 pm. the children are given privacy to speak with the other parent during such times. video or telephone communication between the children and other parent is facilitated when reasonably requested by the children. the children are given privacy to speak with the other parent during such times. the parents are at liberty to attend the children's school/extracurricular activities, but the father does not attend extracurricular lessons, training, or after school care during the weeks in which the children are in the mother's care unless the mother provides written consent or confirms that she is unable to attend. if the mother is due to collect the children, the father vacates the area at least 10 minutes prior. when attending the children's weekend games/matches, it is assumed that the parent with whom the children are spending time will sit with the team's supporters and the other parent will sit at a reasonable distance to minimise tension between the parents. the parents discontinue yelling at and using physical discipline with the children. the children are referred to a psychologist to address underlying anxiety that may be causing nocturnal enuresis in [w] and [z] to bottle his feelings, emotions, and experience of bullying. they may be eligible for a mental health care plan via their gp. ... the mother continues to engage in therapy to address her heightened symptoms of anxiety. the father facilitates the children's attendance at [af club] during his week should the children wish to engage, and at [language] classes online, should they resume. [emphasis added]
mr trim: in your family report interviews with, for example, [w], you recall she was complaining that her mother works too much? ms p: yes. mr trim: well, having – having regard to that, would you – and would you recommend that the mother be restrained by injunction from working at a place like this on a weekend, for example, when the children are meant to be with her, if – if money is not the issue? ms p: yes. mr trim: the need for money is not the issue? ms p: i certainly don’t think it’s in the children’s best interests because of – that did come across clearly that they already – and this certainly wasn’t mentioned to me, and i did ask about... work. but [w] in particular made it clear ... that she felt her mother ... worked too much. she also ... didn’t want to be attending after school care as frequently as she was. so this is in addition to this. so she was already finding that too much, so i don’t think it’s in the best interests of the children. obviously, ... if it is proceeding, then it is important that they have adequate care if she’s working, but ... i can imagine that [w] ... would prefer that her mother does not work.
the parties’ cases
summary of father’s case and witnesses
1a. save for the issue of secondary school, the parents have equal shared parental responsibility for the children. that from 1 july 2023 the father have sole parental responsibility for the children in relation to the high school they attend and for the purpose of this: the father shall contact the mother in writing and provide his views about the high school(s) he nominates, the mother and father shall make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about which high school the children will attend, and if no agreement is reached between the parents by 1 july 2023, the father make the final decision and inform the mother in writing of it. that the children attend [q school or [s school] for their secondary schooling, at the parties’ joint equal expense, or such other school or schools chosen by the father. that the father pay $100,000 into a trust account as security for payment of any school fees and compulsory incidental expenses. that the children live with the parties on a week-about basis (save for unless otherwise agreed between the parties in writing – including via sms / email), with changeover to occur at the conclusion of school or 3:15pm on fridays. that in 2022 the children shall be with the father for the whole of the term 3 school holidays. that the children’s time with the mother be suspended: from 4pm on christmas eve until 4pm on christmas day in 2022, and each alternate year, and from 4pm on christmas day until 4pm on boxing day in 2023, and each alternate year. 8. the children’s time with the father be suspended: from 4pm on christmas day until 4pm on boxing day in 2022, and each alternate year, and from 4pm on christmas eve until 4pm on christmas day in 2023, and each alternate year. that unless otherwise agreed in writing, changeover take place at the children’s school, or mcdonalds in [suburb b] if the children are not then attending school. that the parties shall facilitate the children try to speak with their other parent each sunday and thursday between 6:30pm and 7pm, and as reasonably requested or facilitated by the children – and with the children to be afforded reasonable privacy during these calls. that the father retain the passport for [z] and the mother retain the passport for [w], and these passports be provided to the parent requiring them at least 48 hours before a scheduled international holiday, and be returned to where they shall be stored within 48 hours of arrival back in australia. that the parties be restrained by injunction from working shifts on weekends the children are in their care. that if either parent cannot get the children to school or their scheduled activities on time they shall forthwith notify the other parent and request their assistance to facilitate the children get where they need to be in a timely manner.
... the children say to me when they are with me "i love living here and we want to stay with you all the time because we have fun and do not have to go to work with mummy all the time." they crave the normal routine which only i provide them - and [the mother] does not. she just fails to provide routine, be it [attending] school on time, attending their sporting commitments (training and games) failing to turn up, and often late. i accept that the children may say this to simply to show their love to me and to appease me. i have no doubt that they probably say the same thing to [the mother] but whilst they say these things, it is still being said with truthfulness. ... the children are not unwell. they just didn't get to go to their training. i would have been more than happy to take them. [the mother] just did not want to take them, and she didn't make any arrangements for them to attend. it appears that [the mother] is simply not child focussed. another example of not being child focussed is in the family report when [the mother] took two telephone calls whilst being observed with the children. from my experience, [the mother] is always on her phone whilst at training or at games and whilst we were together, and at every pick up/change over she always prioritised her work, including telephone calls and other nuisances, over the children. ... [the mother] is now declining to take the children to their games. this has happened twice this season, and countless times [the mother] arrives late to saturday morning games – [i] am always there on time, and there to quickly usher [w] into the stadium and comfort her. [the mother] has zero interest in the kids sporting interests, and zero regard for their commitment to teams. she disrespects the children and teams this way. the children hate it, and they love me being there and they can only ever always rely on me to be there for them. i have to tell them which court they are on and rush to get them there as the match has already started. sometimes when [z] gets on the court, he gets confused as to which way their team is going and always looks over to me for help and i quickly gesture which way. the children deserve to warm-up, be part of the team and not be looked down upon by their peers when they are late. [i] always prepare water bottles and snacks for the children as [the mother] does not always bring anything for them. ... i don't say i don't like [country d]. i say is it hot yes?? [in the original]. the children also say they don't like [country d] but deep down they do enjoy going - but definitely not the chaotic schedule driving thousands of kms from place to place and getting sick. they do not like the excessive heat or busy schedule and getting sick from exhaustion.
... as [the mother] cannot look after the children, cannot get them to school and extra-curricular activities on time, i believe that the children should live with more predominately with me to enable [the mother] to concentrate on her businesses/work life. this is her priority as she, continually demonstrates with her actions, week in week out and especially since and during the family report session with [[ms p]]. i do not believe it fair on the children to be stuck up in a room for hours on end whilst [the mother] works at a restaurant or to spend weekends/late weeknights driving around to all hours picking up/dropping off supplies for [the mother’s] business. the children should be having a routine, going to bed at a reasonable hour and getting to places on time, especially once they start to reach their teenage years and commence at high school. [the mother’s] current work life does not support their developmental needs or their best interests.
... i am very worried that [the mother] wants to damage the children's relationship with me by telling them negative things about me and cutting me out of decisions.
ms o’connell: you do. okay. now, you also said basically in the same affidavit you say that you’re the better parent, therefore the children should live more with you, that’s what you put in your affidavit. okay? the father: yes. ... ms o’connell: you say at paragraph 97, which is right at the end of your affidavit:
as [the mother] cannot look after the children, cannot get them to school and extracurricular activities on time, i believe that the children should live with more predominantly with me to enable [the mother] to concentrate on her business/work life. this is her priority, as she continually demonstrates with her actions. okay?
the father: absolutely. yes. yes. ... the father: the children have a strong emotional connection to their mother and, of course, i want them to maintain and grow that emotional connection with their mother, as well as with myself. ... ms o’connell: all right. now, just going back to these reports, and [ms p] in the section 11f report said that in her opinion the mother was lacking in self-esteem. do you agree that the mother lacks in self-esteem? the father: yes. ms o’connell: yes. and you’ve agreed, also, that you’ve said to her when she forgot a pair of runners for one of the kids that she was pathetic and disgusting, that’s right, isn’t it? the father: no. it’s – i said those words. i’m referring to the act of forgetting is pathetic and disgusting. i’m not saying [the mother] is disgusting. i’m saying the act of forgetting an item which is critical for our daughter’s [sports] game is pathetic and disgusting. ms o’connell: yes? the father: that is what is absolutely truth. ms o’connell: you didn’t say to her, “i’m not saying this about you. i’m saying this about an act that it is pathetic and disgusting”? the father: sorry, can you repeat – rephrase? ms o’connell: all right. you said to the mother, “you’re pathetic and disgusting”, didn’t you? the father: yes - - - ms o’connell: thanks? the father: - - - in reference to her forgetting the item. ms o’connell: yes? the father: a very simple item. ms o’connell: yes. and knowing that she is a person with low self-esteem, you would imagine that would have a significant impact on her, wouldn’t you? the father: no. ms o’connell: no? the father: i don’t think that would impact her at all. ms o’connell: okay. right? the father: because i don’t think she believes – doesn’t take on board anything that i say... ... his honour: you remember the occasion [of the child’s eye injury when the mother informed the father]? the father: i do remember the occasion, absolutely, yes. it’s ingrained in my brain the day my daughter sustained a burn on her eye. his honour: and your response was, “i’m not a doctor” and “i was at work”, yes, to me now. yes. yes, ms o’connell. ms o’connell: well, what the mother says that you said was, “why are you contacting me? i’m not a doctor”, that that was the response she got from you, is that correct? the father: i don’t recall the exact words that i said, ms o’connell. ms o’connell: do you recall if it was words to that effect, that, “why are you contacting me”, basically, “i can’t do anything. i’m not a doctor”? the father: possibly words to that effect. i would be calling a hospital if it happened on my clock and arranging medical treatment urgently, but i wouldn’t be holding a baby over a boiling pan of oil in the first place. ... ms o’connell: can i put it to you that you’re constantly critical of the mother, would you agree with that? the father: of some behaviours. ... ms o’connell: i said you’re critical of her for working too much, aren’t you? the father: yes, yes. ms o’connell: some people might say the mother has got a great work ethic, but you approach it from the other way, you’re critical, correct? the father: i’m sure she has a great work ethic. she prioritises that over the children’s needs, consistently. ... ms o’connell: and you’re critical of the mother because she has taken the children regularly to a [country d] [restaurant] and on occasion you’ve heard that she has worked in the [restaurant], is that right? the father: that’s correct. ms o’connell: yes? the father: and the children are upstairs in a room and being – for a better word, neglected on that weekend, every second weekend. when i cherish the time i have with my children, [the mother] is choosing to prioritise working in a [restaurant] and not being paid, so it’s not for financial gain, to forego that time, that quality time with the children and they’re upstairs. and i’ve had a facetime conversation with [w] a couple of weeks ago on a saturday evening. i was at [a sports match] and [w] was on tiktok, so i knew she was online, so i called, and there she is, and i think it’s in my affidavit, maybe 9.30 pm. the time is not the issue, it’s a saturday evening. [z] is there in his [puffer] jacket. that demonstrates to me it might be a cold environment, but that is upstairs away from their mother on a saturday evening which i would be spending with my children, with my children. [the mother] also mentions that she has got flexible working hours, yet, on occasion, she is late to get the children from [after school care] by 6.30 pm. there you go. ... ms o’connell: because you know that the mother is friends with the owner of the [restaurant]? the father: mmm. ms o’connell: very good friends. they socialise, right? the father: mmm. ms o’connell: and so, the mother has been there and helped out on, she says, a couple of occasions, and the kids have been there with her? the father: no, no. the kids are in the same building. the kids are upstairs, isolated, neglected, abandoned. ms o’connell: that’s something you don’t know, is it – isn’t it? the father: i had a facetime call with my daughter, and as you said earlier, [w] is very intelligent and she tells me these things. ms o’connell: yes. yes? the father: yes. yes. ms o’connell: and she wasn’t abandoned, was she? the father: you said she was there with her mother. she wasn’t in the same room as her mother. her mother is downstairs. and it’s a video of her mother [working], moving glasses around. ms o’connell: yes. okay. but - - - ? the father: that’s great, but the children are not with their mother on a saturday evening. they’re upstairs away while she’s working for – not for financial gain, so don’t need the money. what are you foregoing that time for, not to be with your children. that’s my concern. ... ms o’connell: and you seem to know a lot about what you think the mother is doing on a weekend, is that a fair comment? the father: that’s right. ms o’connell: and you’ve got that from the children, have you? the father: yes, from [w]. [emphasis added]
summary of mother’s case and witnesses
... in around march 2020, [the father] moved back to the [suburb o] property. the children's arrangements did not revert to 10 night/4 night fortnightly regime during school terms pursuant to the orders. [mr maletta] and i agreed for the children to spend equal time with us as the children were more or less home-schooled due to melbourne's covid-19 pandemic lockdowns. once the pandemic lockdowns lifted in late 2020, i asked [the father] for the children's arrangements to revert to the 10 night/4 night fortnightly school term regime. at that time, my rental property in [suburb o] was within 8 kms from the children's school. i wanted to provide the children with stability with their return to the classroom in [suburb [v]]. ... around this time, i believe that [the father] was living in a rental property in [suburb v]. subsequently, he moved into his parents’ home in [suburb w]. for a period, he lived in [suburb o] primarily and spent time at his parents' home when the children were in his care. i am not sure as to the dates and [the father’s] movements during this period as he did not update me with regard to his constant changes in residence. i understand that [the father] now lives at a 5-bedroom home that he recently purchased in [suburb r].
... (4) i agree for the children to spend the term 3 2022 holidays with the father, given that the term 2 2022 holidays were spent with me. i acknowledge that the father is making plans to travel with the children. this is exciting for them and i wholeheartedly support this. ... (17) i agree with the recommendation for a parenting coordinator to be appointed to assist [the father] and i with the implementation of the final parenting orders and to reduce conflict between us.
... i refer to paragraph 190 of the report and say that i have not raised any concerns regarding the amount of time the children spend with each parent since march 2021 because i have been too afraid to challenge [the father] and make him angry. i have sought to be cooperative and amicable to avoid a constant cycle of arguments and fights with him. notwithstanding, the children's best interests must be prioritised. i feel that the children's emotional stability, developmental and academic progress depends upon them primarily living in a protective and nurturing home environment. i believe that i continue to provide this environment for the children. ... ... i am concerned that [ms p’s] recommendation for equal time does not take into account the following matters (amongst others): i refer to paragraph 58 of the report. i was extremely nervous on the day that i was to be interviewed by [ms p]. i also felt weary from the emotional toll of these proceedings had had and were continuing to have on me. i just wanted the conflict to end. given the high conflict between us since separation, i have been willing to compromise on matters which i consider to be in the children's best interests, in the hope that my compromise will reduce the conflict between [the father] and i. the conflict has continued despite my compromises. during the family report interview, i expressed to [ms p] that it was my preference for the children to primarily live with me, so that they will have a stable home and continuity of lifestyle during the school terms. i further expressed that i was willing to agree to equal time arrangements for the children. upon reflection, i expressed this sentiment to [ms p] simply to reach an agreement with [the father] and put an end to these proceedings. i literally gave up during the interview. after considering the situation further, i do not agree that an equal time arrangement is truly in the children's best interests. ... generally, [the father] is a loving, devoted father. i encourage the children in their relationship with [the father]. he is a fun dad who loves his children and the children clearly benefit from their growing connection with him. i am always careful not to speak badly about [the father] to the children or to question the children about him. i respect his time with the children. i refer to [ms p's] comments as follows:
“[w] said that her mother does not say anything bad about her father.” (paragraph 157 of the report) “[z] said that his mother does not talk about his father.” (paragraph 177 of the report)
... i am highly educated and i come from a family of professionals. my parents were [educators] and my sister is a [professional] in [country d]. i hold [business degrees and qualifications] in [country d]. ...
the mother’s lateness for events
the secondary school issue
authorities on the secondary school issue
with respect to the power of the court to order private schooling and the cost of same as a parenting order when the parents don’t consent to private schooling, no relevant authorities have been found to support such power of the court.
with respect to the power of the court to make an order that the mother contribute to private school fees - not that this remains in issue given the father's amended position[2] - counsel refers his honour to:
1. love v henderson [1995] famca 160, (1996) flc 92-653, per kay j, particularly:
“it is common, and indeed this case represents the normal situation, for the court to require a party to meet the costs of transporting the child to or from access. in this case, the mother is responsible for the air fares to bring the children to melbourne. in one sense, that is a child support consideration, because s 117 specifically makes reference to the high costs involved in enabling a parent to have access to a child. it would not be unreasonable, in my view, not outside power, for the court to impose other conditions on access, which would of their nature involve economic expenditure, or the provision of goods and services which are capable of being acquired by economic expenditure, so that, for instance if one party owned a beach house, if the custodial parent owned a beach house, the court could order that parent to make the house available for an access period for the non-custodial parent.”
... (and) [ellipses in original]
“under s 64, in proceedings in relation to the access to a child, i may make such order as i consider proper and i must regard the welfare of the child as the paramount consideration. in my view this is the dominant section. it gives me almost unbridled powers to make orders which will promote the welfare of the child. where the legislation does not otherwise allow for the provision of financial support to an access parent, in my view, i can come back to the broad powers contained ins 64 to find the necessary power ...”
2. stewart & stewart [2017] famcafc 67 per bryant cj, aldridge & kent jj, particularly:
[l7] “however, a fundamental difficulty with this contention is, as will shortly be demonstrated, that at no point in the proceedings below did the mother seek or advance orders having the effect that the mother would solely bear this liability eliminating any recourse by the mother to seek contribution from the father via the child support agency.”
... (and)
[l9] “whilst without the benefit of full argument on a point not specifically raised by any grounds of the appeal we do not express a concluded view upon it, our preliminary view as expressed during the hearing is that it is difficult to see how orders for the mother to be solely responsible for private school fees could be characterised as a "child maintenance order ... against, or in favour of [the father]" within the meaning of s 66e(l).”  tation not in original]  7] there is no legal presumption that favours a child’s primary carer choosing the relevant school that the child attends: re g, children’s schooling (re g), low & chapman. consequently, there is no onus of proof cast on either party in the determination of the application. [108] the day-to-day reality of where a child does reside predominantly with one parent is, however, of relevance. in general, it will commonly be in a child’s best interests to attend school which is close to his or her predominant place of residence: bilz & breugelman, re g. however, to state a general principle in that form necessarily invites attention to the anterior questions: what is the child’s predominant place of residence? why is it in a child’s best interests concerning attendance at a school which, although close to one residence, is distant from the other? [109] the parents’ interests in securing an arrangement that is convenient for them is a matter that is appropriate to take into account: eden & eden-proust. this is because, while the interests of the child are required to be the paramount consideration, s 60ca does not provide that those interests are the sole consideration: ams v aif, eden & eden-proust. it follows that some regard should be had to the relative inconvenience to each of the parents with respect to matters such as any necessary transport arrangements: eden & eden-proust. [110] for example, in low & chapman, monahan j observed that to enrol a child at a school which was located at a place mid-point between the parties’ residences was perhaps ‘an obvious option’ where the parties live some distance apart. i did not understand his honour to be suggesting any more than that such an option may be an obvious point for consideration alongside any other suitable options. [111] while it will ordinarily be of importance to consider the effect on the resident parent, this does not mean that the convenience of the non-resident parent is ignored: bilz & breugelman. again, it may be added that the distinction between a resident and non-resident parent becomes diluted where the parties have agreed upon a week about parenting arrangement, particularly one that has been on foot and to which the parties have adhered to for some years. [112] the views of the children may be a relevant but usually not a determinative consideration: s 60cc(3)(a) bilz & breugelman, re g. the child’s views on schooling may be of lesser weight if the child is of a young age: stevens & mclaren. [113] the process of evaluating competing school proposals should not entail an assessment of the relative merits of the schools preferred by the parties, at least in circumstances where those schools are prima facie satisfactory: bilz & breugelman. the location of the school to the children’s residence remains an important factor: re g. [114] the court may be assisted in the resolution of a schooling dispute by the opinions of an expert: stevens & mclaren. by s 60cd(2) the court may ‘inform itself of views expressed by a child’ by a number of means, including a report given to the court by a family consultant under s 62g(2) or, subject to the rules of court, ‘by such other means as the court thinks appropriate’: bondelmonte. [115] competing views have been expressed as to the relevance of the parties’ agreement as to how schooling should be implemented. in eden & eden-proust, thackray j indicated that the existence of an agreement between parties would be an important factor. in re g, the parties’ prior agreement on the issue was held not to carry much weight.  8] the day-to-day reality of where a child does reside predominantly with one parent is, however, of relevance. in general, it will commonly be in a child’s best interests to attend school which is close to his or her predominant place of residence: bilz & breugelman, re g. however, to state a general principle in that form necessarily invites attention to the anterior questions: what is the child’s predominant place of residence? why is it in a child’s best interests concerning attendance at a school which, although close to one residence, is distant from the other? [109] the parents’ interests in securing an arrangement that is convenient for them is a matter that is appropriate to take into account: eden & eden-proust. this is because, while the interests of the child are required to be the paramount consideration, s 60ca does not provide that those interests are the sole consideration: ams v aif, eden & eden-proust. it follows that some regard should be had to the relative inconvenience to each of the parents with respect to matters such as any necessary transport arrangements: eden & eden-proust. [110] for example, in low & chapman, monahan j observed that to enrol a child at a school which was located at a place mid-point between the parties’ residences was perhaps ‘an obvious option’ where the parties live some distance apart. i did not understand his honour to be suggesting any more than that such an option may be an obvious point for consideration alongside any other suitable options. [111] while it will ordinarily be of importance to consider the effect on the resident parent, this does not mean that the convenience of the non-resident parent is ignored: bilz & breugelman. again, it may be added that the distinction between a resident and non-resident parent becomes diluted where the parties have agreed upon a week about parenting arrangement, particularly one that has been on foot and to which the parties have adhered to for some years. [112] the views of the children may be a relevant but usually not a determinative consideration: s 60cc(3)(a) bilz & breugelman, re g. the child’s views on schooling may be of lesser weight if the child is of a young age: stevens & mclaren. [113] the process of evaluating competing school proposals should not entail an assessment of the relative merits of the schools preferred by the parties, at least in circumstances where those schools are prima facie satisfactory: bilz & breugelman. the location of the school to the children’s residence remains an important factor: re g. [114] the court may be assisted in the resolution of a schooling dispute by the opinions of an expert: stevens & mclaren. by s 60cd(2) the court may ‘inform itself of views expressed by a child’ by a number of means, including a report given to the court by a family consultant under s 62g(2) or, subject to the rules of court, ‘by such other means as the court thinks appropriate’: bondelmonte. [115] competing views have been expressed as to the relevance of the parties’ agreement as to how schooling should be implemented. in eden & eden-proust, thackray j indicated that the existence of an agreement between parties would be an important factor. in re g, the parties’ prior agreement on the issue was held not to carry much weight.  9] the parents’ interests in securing an arrangement that is convenient for them is a matter that is appropriate to take into account: eden & eden-proust. this is because, while the interests of the child are required to be the paramount consideration, s 60ca does not provide that those interests are the sole consideration: ams v aif, eden & eden-proust. it follows that some regard should be had to the relative inconvenience to each of the parents with respect to matters such as any necessary transport arrangements: eden & eden-proust. [110] for example, in low & chapman, monahan j observed that to enrol a child at a school which was located at a place mid-point between the parties’ residences was perhaps ‘an obvious option’ where the parties live some distance apart. i did not understand his honour to be suggesting any more than that such an option may be an obvious point for consideration alongside any other suitable options. [111] while it will ordinarily be of importance to consider the effect on the resident parent, this does not mean that the convenience of the non-resident parent is ignored: bilz & breugelman. again, it may be added that the distinction between a resident and non-resident parent becomes diluted where the parties have agreed upon a week about parenting arrangement, particularly one that has been on foot and to which the parties have adhered to for some years. [112] the views of the children may be a relevant but usually not a determinative consideration: s 60cc(3)(a) bilz & breugelman, re g. the child’s views on schooling may be of lesser weight if the child is of a young age: stevens & mclaren. [113] the process of evaluating competing school proposals should not entail an assessment of the relative merits of the schools preferred by the parties, at least in circumstances where those schools are prima facie satisfactory: bilz & breugelman. the location of the school to the children’s residence remains an important factor: re g. [114] the court may be assisted in the resolution of a schooling dispute by the opinions of an expert: stevens & mclaren. by s 60cd(2) the court may ‘inform itself of views expressed by a child’ by a number of means, including a report given to the court by a family consultant under s 62g(2) or, subject to the rules of court, ‘by such other means as the court thinks appropriate’: bondelmonte. [115] competing views have been expressed as to the relevance of the parties’ agreement as to how schooling should be implemented. in eden & eden-proust, thackray j indicated that the existence of an agreement between parties would be an important factor. in re g, the parties’ prior agreement on the issue was held not to carry much weight.  0] for example, in low & chapman, monahan j observed that to enrol a child at a school which was located at a place mid-point between the parties’ residences was perhaps ‘an obvious option’ where the parties live some distance apart. i did not understand his honour to be suggesting any more than that such an option may be an obvious point for consideration alongside any other suitable options. [111] while it will ordinarily be of importance to consider the effect on the resident parent, this does not mean that the convenience of the non-resident parent is ignored: bilz & breugelman. again, it may be added that the distinction between a resident and non-resident parent becomes diluted where the parties have agreed upon a week about parenting arrangement, particularly one that has been on foot and to which the parties have adhered to for some years. [112] the views of the children may be a relevant but usually not a determinative consideration: s 60cc(3)(a) bilz & breugelman, re g. the child’s views on schooling may be of lesser weight if the child is of a young age: stevens & mclaren. [113] the process of evaluating competing school proposals should not entail an assessment of the relative merits of the schools preferred by the parties, at least in circumstances where those schools are prima facie satisfactory: bilz & breugelman. the location of the school to the children’s residence remains an important factor: re g. [114] the court may be assisted in the resolution of a schooling dispute by the opinions of an expert: stevens & mclaren. by s 60cd(2) the court may ‘inform itself of views expressed by a child’ by a number of means, including a report given to the court by a family consultant under s 62g(2) or, subject to the rules of court, ‘by such other means as the court thinks appropriate’: bondelmonte. [115] competing views have been expressed as to the relevance of the parties’ agreement as to how schooling should be implemented. in eden & eden-proust, thackray j indicated that the existence of an agreement between parties would be an important factor. in re g, the parties’ prior agreement on the issue was held not to carry much weight.  1] while it will ordinarily be of importance to consider the effect on the resident parent, this does not mean that the convenience of the non-resident parent is ignored: bilz & breugelman. again, it may be added that the distinction between a resident and non-resident parent becomes diluted where the parties have agreed upon a week about parenting arrangement, particularly one that has been on foot and to which the parties have adhered to for some years. [112] the views of the children may be a relevant but usually not a determinative consideration: s 60cc(3)(a) bilz & breugelman, re g. the child’s views on schooling may be of lesser weight if the child is of a young age: stevens & mclaren. [113] the process of evaluating competing school proposals should not entail an assessment of the relative merits of the schools preferred by the parties, at least in circumstances where those schools are prima facie satisfactory: bilz & breugelman. the location of the school to the children’s residence remains an important factor: re g. [114] the court may be assisted in the resolution of a schooling dispute by the opinions of an expert: stevens & mclaren. by s 60cd(2) the court may ‘inform itself of views expressed by a child’ by a number of means, including a report given to the court by a family consultant under s 62g(2) or, subject to the rules of court, ‘by such other means as the court thinks appropriate’: bondelmonte. [115] competing views have been expressed as to the relevance of the parties’ agreement as to how schooling should be implemented. in eden & eden-proust, thackray j indicated that the existence of an agreement between parties would be an important factor. in re g, the parties’ prior agreement on the issue was held not to carry much weight.  2] the views of the children may be a relevant but usually not a determinative consideration: s 60cc(3)(a) bilz & breugelman, re g. the child’s views on schooling may be of lesser weight if the child is of a young age: stevens & mclaren. [113] the process of evaluating competing school proposals should not entail an assessment of the relative merits of the schools preferred by the parties, at least in circumstances where those schools are prima facie satisfactory: bilz & breugelman. the location of the school to the children’s residence remains an important factor: re g. [114] the court may be assisted in the resolution of a schooling dispute by the opinions of an expert: stevens & mclaren. by s 60cd(2) the court may ‘inform itself of views expressed by a child’ by a number of means, including a report given to the court by a family consultant under s 62g(2) or, subject to the rules of court, ‘by such other means as the court thinks appropriate’: bondelmonte. [115] competing views have been expressed as to the relevance of the parties’ agreement as to how schooling should be implemented. in eden & eden-proust, thackray j indicated that the existence of an agreement between parties would be an important factor. in re g, the parties’ prior agreement on the issue was held not to carry much weight.  3] the process of evaluating competing school proposals should not entail an assessment of the relative merits of the schools preferred by the parties, at least in circumstances where those schools are prima facie satisfactory: bilz & breugelman. the location of the school to the children’s residence remains an important factor: re g. [114] the court may be assisted in the resolution of a schooling dispute by the opinions of an expert: stevens & mclaren. by s 60cd(2) the court may ‘inform itself of views expressed by a child’ by a number of means, including a report given to the court by a family consultant under s 62g(2) or, subject to the rules of court, ‘by such other means as the court thinks appropriate’: bondelmonte. [115] competing views have been expressed as to the relevance of the parties’ agreement as to how schooling should be implemented. in eden & eden-proust, thackray j indicated that the existence of an agreement between parties would be an important factor. in re g, the parties’ prior agreement on the issue was held not to carry much weight.  4] the court may be assisted in the resolution of a schooling dispute by the opinions of an expert: stevens & mclaren. by s 60cd(2) the court may ‘inform itself of views expressed by a child’ by a number of means, including a report given to the court by a family consultant under s 62g(2) or, subject to the rules of court, ‘by such other means as the court thinks appropriate’: bondelmonte. [115] competing views have been expressed as to the relevance of the parties’ agreement as to how schooling should be implemented. in eden & eden-proust, thackray j indicated that the existence of an agreement between parties would be an important factor. in re g, the parties’ prior agreement on the issue was held not to carry much weight.  5] competing views have been expressed as to the relevance of the parties’ agreement as to how schooling should be implemented. in eden & eden-proust, thackray j indicated that the existence of an agreement between parties would be an important factor. in re g, the parties’ prior agreement on the issue was held not to carry much weight.
application of the law
primary considerations
benefit of the children having a meaningful relationship with both parents
the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm.
additional considerations
any views expressed by the child
nature of relationship with each of the child’s parents and other persons
extent each parent has taken or failed to participate in decisions or spend time
extent to which each fulfilled obligations to maintain the children
likely effect of any changes in the children’s circumstances
practical difficulty and expense
capacity to provide for the needs of the children
maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions)
attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of parenthood
any family violence and any family violence order that applies
order that would be least likely to lead to further proceedings
any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks relevant
section 61da and the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility
section 65daa(1), consider equal time
section 65daa(2), consider substantial and significant time  the time the child spends with the parent includes both:   the time the child spends with the parent allows the parent to be involved in:
conclusion - the secondary school issue
who holds the children’s passports
ms o’connell: just one other topic: children’s passports? the father: absolutely. yes. ms o’connell: my client has held those passports. i understand you would like to travel with the children, and my client, of course, travels with the children to [country d]. her proposal is she holds both the passports, that she wants to hold both of them, so she can keep them up to date regularly. okay? the father: mmm. ms o’connell: now, you say you don’t agree to that, as i understand it. you want to hold one of them. is that right? the father: that’s correct. ms o’connell: yes. and why can’t they just simply remain held by the mother? the father: okay. our legal situation that has been going on for four-plus years – i thought and i think the majority of the people in this room thought it was going to be culminating at the end of today. clearly, that is not going to be the case. sadly, i see my ex-wife as a flight risk, and i do not want my children just to be disappearing at some point - - - ms o’connell: okay? the father: - - - and therefore one passport with me will prevent one child from travelling. i am never going to prevent my kids from travelling with their mother, but i will be able to sleep at night knowing that they can’t just up and leave. ms o’connell: and i put it to you you’ve said nothing in her affidavit about her being a flight risk, have you? the father: no. but, ms o’connell, the discussions of – like i said earlier, i – we all expected this to be done and dusted today, and it’s not going to be. ms o’connell: no. no. no, you can’t talk about discussions outside of court. okay. i’m just saying to you there’s nothing in this material that you’ve filed that she’s a flight risk, is there? the father: no. ms o’connell: no. and you’ve said before that she owns property here in melbourne? the father: she owns a property, yes. ms o’connell: yes. okay. and she has got a good job here too? the father: i believe she has a great job. i would love to know what she earns. ms o’connell: yes. okay. all right. and in the event there were any necessity in the future for the children to have a [country d] passport for travel, you wouldn’t be opposed to signing for that, would you? the father: i would not allow my children to have a [country d] passport. they have an australian passport. australian passport enables the children to travel more extensively internationally than a [country d] passport. why would they need a [country d] passport? ms o’connell: okay. and why would you oppose it, can i ask? the father: it’s unnecessary. ms o’connell: yes. any other reason? the father: i don’t believe [country d] is a signatory to the hague convention and the children could travel out of australia on a [country d] passport and vanish.
only australian passports?
permanent injunction restraining the mother from working
christmas day and long summer holidays
non-school changeovers
parenting coordinator and psychologist
13c court may refer parties to family counselling, family dispute resolution and other family services   a court exercising jurisdiction in proceedings under this act may, at any stage in the proceedings, make one or more of the following orders: (a) that one or more of the parties to the proceedings attend family counselling, (b) that the parties to the proceedings attend family dispute resolution, (c) that one or more of the parties to the proceedings participate in an appropriate course, program or other service.   that one or more of the parties to the proceedings attend family counselling, (b) that the parties to the proceedings attend family dispute resolution, (c) that one or more of the parties to the proceedings participate in an appropriate course, program or other service.   that the parties to the proceedings attend family dispute resolution, (c) that one or more of the parties to the proceedings participate in an appropriate course, program or other service.   that one or more of the parties to the proceedings participate in an appropriate course, program or other service.
note 1: before making an order under this section, the court must consider seeking the advice of a family consultant about the services appropriate to the parties’ needs (see section 11e). note 2: the court can also order parties to attend, or arrange for a child to attend, appointments with a family consultant (see section 11f).  the court may suggest a particular purpose for the attendance or participation. (3) the order may require the party or parties to encourage the participation of specified other persons who are likely to be affected by the proceedings.
note: for example, the participation of children, grandparents or other relatives may be encouraged.  the court may make any other orders it considers reasonably necessary or appropriate in relation to the order. (5) the court may make orders under this section: (a) on its own initiative, or (b) on the application of: (i) a party to the proceedings, or (ii) a lawyer independently representing a child’s interests under an order made under section 68l.   on its own initiative, or (b) on the application of: (i) a party to the proceedings, or (ii) a lawyer independently representing a child’s interests under an order made under section 68l.   on the application of: (i) a party to the proceedings, or (ii) a lawyer independently representing a child’s interests under an order made under section 68l.   a party to the proceedings, or (ii) a lawyer independently representing a child’s interests under an order made under section 68l.  ) a lawyer independently representing a child’s interests under an order made under section 68l.
13d consequences of failure to comply with order under section 13c   if a party fails to comply with an order of a court under section 13c, the family counsellor, family dispute resolution practitioner or provider of the course, program or other service must report the failure to the court. (2) on receiving the report, the court may make any further orders it considers appropriate. (3) the court may make orders under subsection (2): (a) on its own initiative, or (b) on the application of: (i) a party to the proceedings, or (ii) a lawyer independently representing a child’s interests under an order made under section 68l.
sporting & extracurricular activities
conclusion
his honour: now, the question i want some assistance – or whether you’re able to assist me with it. you may say, “look, it’s just self-evident”, but the issues that you raise about the father’s opinion of the mother as a parent, his – what you say, continued harassment and the combination – all those list of things and i won’t repeat them – combined with her personality and the impact that that has on her. how does that inform the decision about week-about or ten/four or five/nine? how does that inform that decision? ms o’connell: my client is concerned about the more time that the children are in the father’s care, the more control he has over the children, the more control he has over her, and the more influence he has over the children against her. so she says from an emotional and psychological perspective, the children are – the best interests are met by being primarily in her care. the evidence does not support that the mother is constantly critical of the father. the evidence does support the other way.
his honour: what do you say about the dynamic of [the mother’s] personality, as ms o’connell would have it, that was put to [ms p], that - - - mr trim: your honour, i’ve - - - his honour: - - - she gives up. mr trim: sure. i’ve got a few things to say about that. his honour: yes. mr trim: and it was very telling evidence and it was so relevant. it was to do with the psychometric testing and it completely blew up the argument, in my submission, that this alleged – or the submission that my client is the guy of the 11f report. she went through the psychometric testing and it was valid for him at the family report and it was actually the opposite. the person who had the positive impression management was the mother, and so i think you should be a little bit careful of just accepting the submission and there is some evidence his honour: you can assume i’m going to be careful about accepting any submission about anything. mr trim: yes. okay. no, i gather that, your honour. i gathered that, which is great, but i’m submitting you should be careful in accepting that she’s as anxious or unconfident as she says she is or as she may have presented because of the psychometric testing of her. and, also, a really big piece of evidence in this case, your honour, is exhibit h5, which is this invoice, and i will call it the fake invoice. .... ... mr trim: ...it’s more to the effect that he was cross-examined about, you know, “where’s the dishonesty?”, and she knew – she knew full well what the issue was, your honour, and it only finally, thankfully, emerged today. and so to say she’s – you know, he’s the one that’s confident and she’s just bending over, i don’t think that’s right. it’s a really important document. and with respect to this issue of lateness, your honour, you might get preoccupied with the business records, the school reports, but that’s just one part of it. my client’s case is late to school, late to pick up, late to extracurricular activities, missing extracurricular activities, late to changeover. it’s across the board and the family report writer supports that or that’s her assessment of the mother. ...
paragraph of mother’s minute of orders sought (w1)
paragraph of draft orders dealing with matter
paragraph of consent orders (a) dealing with the matter
reason
17
20(a)
10
i gave greater weight to the drafting of the consent order a and qualified the consent drafting by adding the word ‘save in an emergency’ and the words ‘no less than 14 days beforehand’ to 20(b).
21
13(b) & (c)
11(a) & (b)
i gave greater weight to the drafting of the consent order a.
22
13(a)
11(a)
as above.
27
10(a)
29
21(c)
not agreed
see paragraph 96 of the reasons and see below.
associate: dated: 4 may 2023
dated: 4 may 2023
[1] the instructions are contained in exhibit w4 of 16 september 2022, an email of 8 pages (or 9 as one page is double sided) of email and attachments of small font and the attendance by a family member or friend is contained in one of thirteen small dot point paragraphs at page 6a of the seventh page of the exhibit.[2] amended in final address on day four of the hearing.