last updated: 31 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
carevic & carevic [2023] fedcfamc2f 524
orders
the court orders that:  the sum of $1,592,948 to the applicant wife ms carevic, (b) the sum of $1,153,450 to the respondent husband mr carevic, and (c) any balance to be divided 58/42 in the wife’s favour.   the sum of $1,153,450 to the respondent husband mr carevic, and (c) any balance to be divided 58/42 in the wife’s favour.   any balance to be divided 58/42 in the wife’s favour.   each party shall be entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property and financial resources of any nature and kind (including choses-in-action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party shall forego any claims they may have to superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (c) insurance policies shall remain the sole property of the owner/beneficiary named therein, and (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any personal liabilities and any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.   each party shall forego any claims they may have to superannuation benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (c) insurance policies shall remain the sole property of the owner/beneficiary named therein, and (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any personal liabilities and any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.   insurance policies shall remain the sole property of the owner/beneficiary named therein, and (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any personal liabilities and any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any personal liabilities and any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.
reasons for judgmentamended pursuant to r 10.14(b) of the federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth) on 19 may 2023.
judge obradovic:
introduction   that the parties separated in mid-2019, (b) that the husband was verbally and physically abusive towards the wife as she claims, (c) that the wife’s contributions were made more arduous as a consequence of the family violence, and (d) that there should be an adjustment of the parties’ property interests as to 58% in favour of the wife and as to 42% in favour of the husband.   that the husband was verbally and physically abusive towards the wife as she claims, (c) that the wife’s contributions were made more arduous as a consequence of the family violence, and (d) that there should be an adjustment of the parties’ property interests as to 58% in favour of the wife and as to 42% in favour of the husband.   that the wife’s contributions were made more arduous as a consequence of the family violence, and (d) that there should be an adjustment of the parties’ property interests as to 58% in favour of the wife and as to 42% in favour of the husband.   that there should be an adjustment of the parties’ property interests as to 58% in favour of the wife and as to 42% in favour of the husband.
credit and evidentiary inferences
relevant legal principles
legal principles regarding the kennon claim
the question is whether a trial judge may infer from the evidence that the result must be that a party’s contributions have been affected.
the respondent submitted that the appellant’s evidence was not relevant to an issue because even if it was evidence of family violence, the appellant had called no evidence to suggest that the violence had made her contributions more onerous. this submission overlooks the obvious point that the court can infer from appropriate evidence that there was a nexus between the conduct and the relevant contributions.
findings of fact[14]
real property bought and sold by the parties
the various family businesses and business dealings
suburb u property development
the suburb c property and its development  $53,577 for fees and costs, (b) $334,044 for the repayment of the second loan plus legal fees and interests, and (c) $252,761 for the discharge of the amount owing on the husband’s nab mortgage account.   $334,044 for the repayment of the second loan plus legal fees and interests, and (c) $252,761 for the discharge of the amount owing on the husband’s nab mortgage account.   $252,761 for the discharge of the amount owing on the husband’s nab mortgage account.
overseas properties
violence perpetrated by the husband  the husband would often call the wife “bitch” and “slut”, (b) in or about 1988, the husband slapped the wife across the face, causing her nose to bleed. the husband then pushed the wife to the ground and started kicking her with both feet. following this incident the wife left the parties’ home and went to a women’s refuge. she did not go to the police and returned to the family home after a few months, (c) throughout the relationship, if the wife refused to have sexual intercourse with the husband as he demanded, she would get beat-up, or hit or be verbally abused, (d) at various times over the years until late 2009, when the husband asked the wife for money and she refused his request, he would sometimes take hold of her arm and twist it behind her back causing her pain. she would then write out a cheque for the sum the husband requested, or provide him with a blank cheque, (e) in early 2010, at around 2am the husband, after being asked by the wife what he was doing, as he was in his car at the time, shouted at the wife “i am going to kill you.” he then opened the car door and got out. the wife was frightened and she ran down the street and hid. after following her for a short while, the husband returned to his car, and drove past. the wife then returned to the parties’ home and called the police. she hid in the home until the police arrived. while the police were there, the husband returned to the property. the police asked him to leave, and he did. the wife was concerned that he would return after the police left, as he had previously told her that he was not scared of the police and she believed him. mr h and the other two children, who were present at home on the night, were frightened, and mr h said to the mother that she should go and stay with her mother and that they would be ok. the wife made the decision to leave the home and spent time in a refuge in suburb bb after initially staying with a friend. the parties’ daughter ms g moved in with the maternal grandmother, while mr h and mr j stayed at the family home. only mr j was a minor at this stage. the wife kept in daily contact with the children and supported them both emotionally and financially while she lived in the refuge. while she lived in the refuge the wife applied for and was in receipt of centrelink benefits, (f) the wife stayed in a refuge for a period of about three months in mid-2011. while the wife did not give any evidence about the events leading to her moving into a refuge, it is inferred that she did not do so except out of necessity and as a result of fleeing from family violence, (g) in 2012, the wife again left the family home and returned to the shelter she had been to in 2010, (h) the husband incessantly telephoned the wife over three days in early 2012, (i) in 2013, the wife visited the husband, on the husband’s invitation, whilst he was away working in perth. during this trip, the husband threatened her by saying “if you do not give me back my money i will kill you”. she immediately left perth after the husband made the threat as she was frightened, (j) several weeks after the incident referred to immediately above at (i), the husband attended the suburb c property unannounced and looked at the wife in what she describes as a “threatening way”, which forced her to immediately vacate the property and seek assistance from the police, where a provisional apprehended violence order (“avo”) was made in early 2013. weapons owned by the husband were seized by the police at the time of these events. the husband’s ownership of these weapons made his threats to kill all the more grave and frightening, (k) in 2013, the wife arranged a meeting with a “forensic accountant, the respondent, 2 security guards, my two sons and me” to discuss the accounts and where the money had gone. this information was placed on a universal serial bus (“usb”) and provided to the husband. during this meeting the husband became angry then stood up and threw his arms around while yelling. after the husband sat back down, the wife walked to another table to collect a receipt to show the husband. when she returned to the table the husband stood up, picked up a canister of bug spray and proceeded to swing the can up and down in the direction of the wife, telling her to “shut up and not say a word.” the wife was scared that if she said anything more that the husband would throw the canister at her, as the husband was about a meter away. after the husband was handed the usb, the husband said words to the effect that “i will make her eat it”, (l) in mid-2013, an interim apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) was made for the protection of the wife, (m) in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   in or about 1988, the husband slapped the wife across the face, causing her nose to bleed. the husband then pushed the wife to the ground and started kicking her with both feet. following this incident the wife left the parties’ home and went to a women’s refuge. she did not go to the police and returned to the family home after a few months, (c) throughout the relationship, if the wife refused to have sexual intercourse with the husband as he demanded, she would get beat-up, or hit or be verbally abused, (d) at various times over the years until late 2009, when the husband asked the wife for money and she refused his request, he would sometimes take hold of her arm and twist it behind her back causing her pain. she would then write out a cheque for the sum the husband requested, or provide him with a blank cheque, (e) in early 2010, at around 2am the husband, after being asked by the wife what he was doing, as he was in his car at the time, shouted at the wife “i am going to kill you.” he then opened the car door and got out. the wife was frightened and she ran down the street and hid. after following her for a short while, the husband returned to his car, and drove past. the wife then returned to the parties’ home and called the police. she hid in the home until the police arrived. while the police were there, the husband returned to the property. the police asked him to leave, and he did. the wife was concerned that he would return after the police left, as he had previously told her that he was not scared of the police and she believed him. mr h and the other two children, who were present at home on the night, were frightened, and mr h said to the mother that she should go and stay with her mother and that they would be ok. the wife made the decision to leave the home and spent time in a refuge in suburb bb after initially staying with a friend. the parties’ daughter ms g moved in with the maternal grandmother, while mr h and mr j stayed at the family home. only mr j was a minor at this stage. the wife kept in daily contact with the children and supported them both emotionally and financially while she lived in the refuge. while she lived in the refuge the wife applied for and was in receipt of centrelink benefits, (f) the wife stayed in a refuge for a period of about three months in mid-2011. while the wife did not give any evidence about the events leading to her moving into a refuge, it is inferred that she did not do so except out of necessity and as a result of fleeing from family violence, (g) in 2012, the wife again left the family home and returned to the shelter she had been to in 2010, (h) the husband incessantly telephoned the wife over three days in early 2012, (i) in 2013, the wife visited the husband, on the husband’s invitation, whilst he was away working in perth. during this trip, the husband threatened her by saying “if you do not give me back my money i will kill you”. she immediately left perth after the husband made the threat as she was frightened, (j) several weeks after the incident referred to immediately above at (i), the husband attended the suburb c property unannounced and looked at the wife in what she describes as a “threatening way”, which forced her to immediately vacate the property and seek assistance from the police, where a provisional apprehended violence order (“avo”) was made in early 2013. weapons owned by the husband were seized by the police at the time of these events. the husband’s ownership of these weapons made his threats to kill all the more grave and frightening, (k) in 2013, the wife arranged a meeting with a “forensic accountant, the respondent, 2 security guards, my two sons and me” to discuss the accounts and where the money had gone. this information was placed on a universal serial bus (“usb”) and provided to the husband. during this meeting the husband became angry then stood up and threw his arms around while yelling. after the husband sat back down, the wife walked to another table to collect a receipt to show the husband. when she returned to the table the husband stood up, picked up a canister of bug spray and proceeded to swing the can up and down in the direction of the wife, telling her to “shut up and not say a word.” the wife was scared that if she said anything more that the husband would throw the canister at her, as the husband was about a meter away. after the husband was handed the usb, the husband said words to the effect that “i will make her eat it”, (l) in mid-2013, an interim apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) was made for the protection of the wife, (m) in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   throughout the relationship, if the wife refused to have sexual intercourse with the husband as he demanded, she would get beat-up, or hit or be verbally abused, (d) at various times over the years until late 2009, when the husband asked the wife for money and she refused his request, he would sometimes take hold of her arm and twist it behind her back causing her pain. she would then write out a cheque for the sum the husband requested, or provide him with a blank cheque, (e) in early 2010, at around 2am the husband, after being asked by the wife what he was doing, as he was in his car at the time, shouted at the wife “i am going to kill you.” he then opened the car door and got out. the wife was frightened and she ran down the street and hid. after following her for a short while, the husband returned to his car, and drove past. the wife then returned to the parties’ home and called the police. she hid in the home until the police arrived. while the police were there, the husband returned to the property. the police asked him to leave, and he did. the wife was concerned that he would return after the police left, as he had previously told her that he was not scared of the police and she believed him. mr h and the other two children, who were present at home on the night, were frightened, and mr h said to the mother that she should go and stay with her mother and that they would be ok. the wife made the decision to leave the home and spent time in a refuge in suburb bb after initially staying with a friend. the parties’ daughter ms g moved in with the maternal grandmother, while mr h and mr j stayed at the family home. only mr j was a minor at this stage. the wife kept in daily contact with the children and supported them both emotionally and financially while she lived in the refuge. while she lived in the refuge the wife applied for and was in receipt of centrelink benefits, (f) the wife stayed in a refuge for a period of about three months in mid-2011. while the wife did not give any evidence about the events leading to her moving into a refuge, it is inferred that she did not do so except out of necessity and as a result of fleeing from family violence, (g) in 2012, the wife again left the family home and returned to the shelter she had been to in 2010, (h) the husband incessantly telephoned the wife over three days in early 2012, (i) in 2013, the wife visited the husband, on the husband’s invitation, whilst he was away working in perth. during this trip, the husband threatened her by saying “if you do not give me back my money i will kill you”. she immediately left perth after the husband made the threat as she was frightened, (j) several weeks after the incident referred to immediately above at (i), the husband attended the suburb c property unannounced and looked at the wife in what she describes as a “threatening way”, which forced her to immediately vacate the property and seek assistance from the police, where a provisional apprehended violence order (“avo”) was made in early 2013. weapons owned by the husband were seized by the police at the time of these events. the husband’s ownership of these weapons made his threats to kill all the more grave and frightening, (k) in 2013, the wife arranged a meeting with a “forensic accountant, the respondent, 2 security guards, my two sons and me” to discuss the accounts and where the money had gone. this information was placed on a universal serial bus (“usb”) and provided to the husband. during this meeting the husband became angry then stood up and threw his arms around while yelling. after the husband sat back down, the wife walked to another table to collect a receipt to show the husband. when she returned to the table the husband stood up, picked up a canister of bug spray and proceeded to swing the can up and down in the direction of the wife, telling her to “shut up and not say a word.” the wife was scared that if she said anything more that the husband would throw the canister at her, as the husband was about a meter away. after the husband was handed the usb, the husband said words to the effect that “i will make her eat it”, (l) in mid-2013, an interim apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) was made for the protection of the wife, (m) in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   at various times over the years until late 2009, when the husband asked the wife for money and she refused his request, he would sometimes take hold of her arm and twist it behind her back causing her pain. she would then write out a cheque for the sum the husband requested, or provide him with a blank cheque, (e) in early 2010, at around 2am the husband, after being asked by the wife what he was doing, as he was in his car at the time, shouted at the wife “i am going to kill you.” he then opened the car door and got out. the wife was frightened and she ran down the street and hid. after following her for a short while, the husband returned to his car, and drove past. the wife then returned to the parties’ home and called the police. she hid in the home until the police arrived. while the police were there, the husband returned to the property. the police asked him to leave, and he did. the wife was concerned that he would return after the police left, as he had previously told her that he was not scared of the police and she believed him. mr h and the other two children, who were present at home on the night, were frightened, and mr h said to the mother that she should go and stay with her mother and that they would be ok. the wife made the decision to leave the home and spent time in a refuge in suburb bb after initially staying with a friend. the parties’ daughter ms g moved in with the maternal grandmother, while mr h and mr j stayed at the family home. only mr j was a minor at this stage. the wife kept in daily contact with the children and supported them both emotionally and financially while she lived in the refuge. while she lived in the refuge the wife applied for and was in receipt of centrelink benefits, (f) the wife stayed in a refuge for a period of about three months in mid-2011. while the wife did not give any evidence about the events leading to her moving into a refuge, it is inferred that she did not do so except out of necessity and as a result of fleeing from family violence, (g) in 2012, the wife again left the family home and returned to the shelter she had been to in 2010, (h) the husband incessantly telephoned the wife over three days in early 2012, (i) in 2013, the wife visited the husband, on the husband’s invitation, whilst he was away working in perth. during this trip, the husband threatened her by saying “if you do not give me back my money i will kill you”. she immediately left perth after the husband made the threat as she was frightened, (j) several weeks after the incident referred to immediately above at (i), the husband attended the suburb c property unannounced and looked at the wife in what she describes as a “threatening way”, which forced her to immediately vacate the property and seek assistance from the police, where a provisional apprehended violence order (“avo”) was made in early 2013. weapons owned by the husband were seized by the police at the time of these events. the husband’s ownership of these weapons made his threats to kill all the more grave and frightening, (k) in 2013, the wife arranged a meeting with a “forensic accountant, the respondent, 2 security guards, my two sons and me” to discuss the accounts and where the money had gone. this information was placed on a universal serial bus (“usb”) and provided to the husband. during this meeting the husband became angry then stood up and threw his arms around while yelling. after the husband sat back down, the wife walked to another table to collect a receipt to show the husband. when she returned to the table the husband stood up, picked up a canister of bug spray and proceeded to swing the can up and down in the direction of the wife, telling her to “shut up and not say a word.” the wife was scared that if she said anything more that the husband would throw the canister at her, as the husband was about a meter away. after the husband was handed the usb, the husband said words to the effect that “i will make her eat it”, (l) in mid-2013, an interim apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) was made for the protection of the wife, (m) in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   in early 2010, at around 2am the husband, after being asked by the wife what he was doing, as he was in his car at the time, shouted at the wife “i am going to kill you.” he then opened the car door and got out. the wife was frightened and she ran down the street and hid. after following her for a short while, the husband returned to his car, and drove past. the wife then returned to the parties’ home and called the police. she hid in the home until the police arrived. while the police were there, the husband returned to the property. the police asked him to leave, and he did. the wife was concerned that he would return after the police left, as he had previously told her that he was not scared of the police and she believed him. mr h and the other two children, who were present at home on the night, were frightened, and mr h said to the mother that she should go and stay with her mother and that they would be ok. the wife made the decision to leave the home and spent time in a refuge in suburb bb after initially staying with a friend. the parties’ daughter ms g moved in with the maternal grandmother, while mr h and mr j stayed at the family home. only mr j was a minor at this stage. the wife kept in daily contact with the children and supported them both emotionally and financially while she lived in the refuge. while she lived in the refuge the wife applied for and was in receipt of centrelink benefits, (f) the wife stayed in a refuge for a period of about three months in mid-2011. while the wife did not give any evidence about the events leading to her moving into a refuge, it is inferred that she did not do so except out of necessity and as a result of fleeing from family violence, (g) in 2012, the wife again left the family home and returned to the shelter she had been to in 2010, (h) the husband incessantly telephoned the wife over three days in early 2012, (i) in 2013, the wife visited the husband, on the husband’s invitation, whilst he was away working in perth. during this trip, the husband threatened her by saying “if you do not give me back my money i will kill you”. she immediately left perth after the husband made the threat as she was frightened, (j) several weeks after the incident referred to immediately above at (i), the husband attended the suburb c property unannounced and looked at the wife in what she describes as a “threatening way”, which forced her to immediately vacate the property and seek assistance from the police, where a provisional apprehended violence order (“avo”) was made in early 2013. weapons owned by the husband were seized by the police at the time of these events. the husband’s ownership of these weapons made his threats to kill all the more grave and frightening, (k) in 2013, the wife arranged a meeting with a “forensic accountant, the respondent, 2 security guards, my two sons and me” to discuss the accounts and where the money had gone. this information was placed on a universal serial bus (“usb”) and provided to the husband. during this meeting the husband became angry then stood up and threw his arms around while yelling. after the husband sat back down, the wife walked to another table to collect a receipt to show the husband. when she returned to the table the husband stood up, picked up a canister of bug spray and proceeded to swing the can up and down in the direction of the wife, telling her to “shut up and not say a word.” the wife was scared that if she said anything more that the husband would throw the canister at her, as the husband was about a meter away. after the husband was handed the usb, the husband said words to the effect that “i will make her eat it”, (l) in mid-2013, an interim apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) was made for the protection of the wife, (m) in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   the wife stayed in a refuge for a period of about three months in mid-2011. while the wife did not give any evidence about the events leading to her moving into a refuge, it is inferred that she did not do so except out of necessity and as a result of fleeing from family violence, (g) in 2012, the wife again left the family home and returned to the shelter she had been to in 2010, (h) the husband incessantly telephoned the wife over three days in early 2012, (i) in 2013, the wife visited the husband, on the husband’s invitation, whilst he was away working in perth. during this trip, the husband threatened her by saying “if you do not give me back my money i will kill you”. she immediately left perth after the husband made the threat as she was frightened, (j) several weeks after the incident referred to immediately above at (i), the husband attended the suburb c property unannounced and looked at the wife in what she describes as a “threatening way”, which forced her to immediately vacate the property and seek assistance from the police, where a provisional apprehended violence order (“avo”) was made in early 2013. weapons owned by the husband were seized by the police at the time of these events. the husband’s ownership of these weapons made his threats to kill all the more grave and frightening, (k) in 2013, the wife arranged a meeting with a “forensic accountant, the respondent, 2 security guards, my two sons and me” to discuss the accounts and where the money had gone. this information was placed on a universal serial bus (“usb”) and provided to the husband. during this meeting the husband became angry then stood up and threw his arms around while yelling. after the husband sat back down, the wife walked to another table to collect a receipt to show the husband. when she returned to the table the husband stood up, picked up a canister of bug spray and proceeded to swing the can up and down in the direction of the wife, telling her to “shut up and not say a word.” the wife was scared that if she said anything more that the husband would throw the canister at her, as the husband was about a meter away. after the husband was handed the usb, the husband said words to the effect that “i will make her eat it”, (l) in mid-2013, an interim apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) was made for the protection of the wife, (m) in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   in 2012, the wife again left the family home and returned to the shelter she had been to in 2010, (h) the husband incessantly telephoned the wife over three days in early 2012, (i) in 2013, the wife visited the husband, on the husband’s invitation, whilst he was away working in perth. during this trip, the husband threatened her by saying “if you do not give me back my money i will kill you”. she immediately left perth after the husband made the threat as she was frightened, (j) several weeks after the incident referred to immediately above at (i), the husband attended the suburb c property unannounced and looked at the wife in what she describes as a “threatening way”, which forced her to immediately vacate the property and seek assistance from the police, where a provisional apprehended violence order (“avo”) was made in early 2013. weapons owned by the husband were seized by the police at the time of these events. the husband’s ownership of these weapons made his threats to kill all the more grave and frightening, (k) in 2013, the wife arranged a meeting with a “forensic accountant, the respondent, 2 security guards, my two sons and me” to discuss the accounts and where the money had gone. this information was placed on a universal serial bus (“usb”) and provided to the husband. during this meeting the husband became angry then stood up and threw his arms around while yelling. after the husband sat back down, the wife walked to another table to collect a receipt to show the husband. when she returned to the table the husband stood up, picked up a canister of bug spray and proceeded to swing the can up and down in the direction of the wife, telling her to “shut up and not say a word.” the wife was scared that if she said anything more that the husband would throw the canister at her, as the husband was about a meter away. after the husband was handed the usb, the husband said words to the effect that “i will make her eat it”, (l) in mid-2013, an interim apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) was made for the protection of the wife, (m) in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   the husband incessantly telephoned the wife over three days in early 2012, (i) in 2013, the wife visited the husband, on the husband’s invitation, whilst he was away working in perth. during this trip, the husband threatened her by saying “if you do not give me back my money i will kill you”. she immediately left perth after the husband made the threat as she was frightened, (j) several weeks after the incident referred to immediately above at (i), the husband attended the suburb c property unannounced and looked at the wife in what she describes as a “threatening way”, which forced her to immediately vacate the property and seek assistance from the police, where a provisional apprehended violence order (“avo”) was made in early 2013. weapons owned by the husband were seized by the police at the time of these events. the husband’s ownership of these weapons made his threats to kill all the more grave and frightening, (k) in 2013, the wife arranged a meeting with a “forensic accountant, the respondent, 2 security guards, my two sons and me” to discuss the accounts and where the money had gone. this information was placed on a universal serial bus (“usb”) and provided to the husband. during this meeting the husband became angry then stood up and threw his arms around while yelling. after the husband sat back down, the wife walked to another table to collect a receipt to show the husband. when she returned to the table the husband stood up, picked up a canister of bug spray and proceeded to swing the can up and down in the direction of the wife, telling her to “shut up and not say a word.” the wife was scared that if she said anything more that the husband would throw the canister at her, as the husband was about a meter away. after the husband was handed the usb, the husband said words to the effect that “i will make her eat it”, (l) in mid-2013, an interim apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) was made for the protection of the wife, (m) in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   in 2013, the wife visited the husband, on the husband’s invitation, whilst he was away working in perth. during this trip, the husband threatened her by saying “if you do not give me back my money i will kill you”. she immediately left perth after the husband made the threat as she was frightened, (j) several weeks after the incident referred to immediately above at (i), the husband attended the suburb c property unannounced and looked at the wife in what she describes as a “threatening way”, which forced her to immediately vacate the property and seek assistance from the police, where a provisional apprehended violence order (“avo”) was made in early 2013. weapons owned by the husband were seized by the police at the time of these events. the husband’s ownership of these weapons made his threats to kill all the more grave and frightening, (k) in 2013, the wife arranged a meeting with a “forensic accountant, the respondent, 2 security guards, my two sons and me” to discuss the accounts and where the money had gone. this information was placed on a universal serial bus (“usb”) and provided to the husband. during this meeting the husband became angry then stood up and threw his arms around while yelling. after the husband sat back down, the wife walked to another table to collect a receipt to show the husband. when she returned to the table the husband stood up, picked up a canister of bug spray and proceeded to swing the can up and down in the direction of the wife, telling her to “shut up and not say a word.” the wife was scared that if she said anything more that the husband would throw the canister at her, as the husband was about a meter away. after the husband was handed the usb, the husband said words to the effect that “i will make her eat it”, (l) in mid-2013, an interim apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) was made for the protection of the wife, (m) in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   several weeks after the incident referred to immediately above at (i), the husband attended the suburb c property unannounced and looked at the wife in what she describes as a “threatening way”, which forced her to immediately vacate the property and seek assistance from the police, where a provisional apprehended violence order (“avo”) was made in early 2013. weapons owned by the husband were seized by the police at the time of these events. the husband’s ownership of these weapons made his threats to kill all the more grave and frightening, (k) in 2013, the wife arranged a meeting with a “forensic accountant, the respondent, 2 security guards, my two sons and me” to discuss the accounts and where the money had gone. this information was placed on a universal serial bus (“usb”) and provided to the husband. during this meeting the husband became angry then stood up and threw his arms around while yelling. after the husband sat back down, the wife walked to another table to collect a receipt to show the husband. when she returned to the table the husband stood up, picked up a canister of bug spray and proceeded to swing the can up and down in the direction of the wife, telling her to “shut up and not say a word.” the wife was scared that if she said anything more that the husband would throw the canister at her, as the husband was about a meter away. after the husband was handed the usb, the husband said words to the effect that “i will make her eat it”, (l) in mid-2013, an interim apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) was made for the protection of the wife, (m) in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   in 2013, the wife arranged a meeting with a “forensic accountant, the respondent, 2 security guards, my two sons and me” to discuss the accounts and where the money had gone. this information was placed on a universal serial bus (“usb”) and provided to the husband. during this meeting the husband became angry then stood up and threw his arms around while yelling. after the husband sat back down, the wife walked to another table to collect a receipt to show the husband. when she returned to the table the husband stood up, picked up a canister of bug spray and proceeded to swing the can up and down in the direction of the wife, telling her to “shut up and not say a word.” the wife was scared that if she said anything more that the husband would throw the canister at her, as the husband was about a meter away. after the husband was handed the usb, the husband said words to the effect that “i will make her eat it”, (l) in mid-2013, an interim apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) was made for the protection of the wife, (m) in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   in mid-2013, an interim apprehended domestic violence order (“advo”) was made for the protection of the wife, (m) in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   in 2014, the husband entered the wife’s bedroom around 9pm and placed both of this hands around her throat. he then pressed hard on her throat and she struggled to breathe. the husband then began to hit the wife with closed fists in the side of the head. after the husband stopped hitting her, the wife drove herself to cc hospital for an examination and attended the hospital again the following day. the wife thereafter went to a refuge where she stayed for an undisclosed period of time, (n) in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   in 2015, there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3½ months, until she moved in with her mother, and (o) in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.   in 2019, the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. this was after the wife went to buy the husband items, and gave him $300 cash. this incident resulted in the wife phoning the police, who issued and interim avo with a final avo issued in mid-2019 by consent. the husband says that he consented to the avo but that he did not “admit any of the allegations”.
there was a party which the husband left and instead he went to the pub. when he came back he was sitting in his car, when the wife approached him at 2am. he then threatened to kill her, and she became frightened and ran to hide. he got out of his car and went looking for her and then got back in his car and drove off past her. the wife then went back into the house and called the police. the police were there when the husband arrived back home, he was told by the police to leave and he did so. the wife left the home and lived in a refuge. thereafter mr h called the father and told him that the wife had left.
were the wife’s contributions more arduous as a consequence of the family violence?
the husband’s gambling
missing moneys
the [suburb u unit] has to go on the market. this house [suburb l] has to go on the market. we cannot be together anymore and i cannot own property with you anymore while the money is missing.   savings amounts husband claims he told the wife to ‘put away’ after completing construction works between 2000 and 2009 totalling $750,000. the husband says that, when asking the wife about the money and the wife’s claim that he had gambled it, he said “okay, let’s say i gambled $200,000, where is the rest of the money?” the husband contends the wife cannot explain the missing funds of over and above $200,000, amounting to $550,000, and (b) undisclosed funds from 2009, to which the wife had access to the exclusion of the husband. the husband says that it is impossible for the wife to make payments she claimed from her disclosed earnings. the husband submits that, during the period after the sale of the suburb l property, if the wife had access to funds in accounts they were funds derived from the relationship. the husband submits that it is open to the court to find that it is more than likely the wife had access to undisclosed funds in excess of $50,000, with a specific amount of $100,000.   undisclosed funds from 2009, to which the wife had access to the exclusion of the husband. the husband says that it is impossible for the wife to make payments she claimed from her disclosed earnings. the husband submits that, during the period after the sale of the suburb l property, if the wife had access to funds in accounts they were funds derived from the relationship. the husband submits that it is open to the court to find that it is more than likely the wife had access to undisclosed funds in excess of $50,000, with a specific amount of $100,000.
when did the parties separate?
contributions to the family
current circumstances
non-disclosure
the pool
ownership
description
value
joint
moneys held on trust from sale of suburb c property
$2,746,398
household contents
$25,000
wife
motor vehicle 1
$29,500
bank account (cba #...31) @ 11 may 2022
$473
“f business” bank account (ff bank #...43) @ 11 may 2022
$7,304
“f business” bank account (ff bank #...90) @ 11 may 2022
$29,875
business trading as “f business”
$30,000
superannuation
$38,961
ato debt  2,222)
wife’s vehicle loan  5,266)
husband
motor vehicle 2
$18,000
motor vehicle 3
$7,500
motor vehicle 4
$6,500
total:
$2,882,023
determination
issues identified by parties
2. issue as to non-disclosure by each party. issue as to what each of the parties held at the date of separation, depending on which of the separation dates is accepted by the court. 4. issue as to the nature and extent of the parties' contributions overall. issue as to the contribution by the husband through his own physical labour to the construction of homes and investment properties. issue as to the contribution by the husband to the development and subdivision of [suburb c]. 7. issue as to whether section 75(2) factors favour either party. the husband says that savings accumulated by the parties in the period leading up to 2009 in the sum of at least $750,000 are unaccounted for and were taken by the wife. the husband asserts that the wife removed from the marriage without his knowledge or consent for her own purposes further amounts of money prior to 2009. the wife denies this. the husband says that the parties' home at [m street, suburb l] was sold in about [late] 2009 for $765,000 and that the net proceeds of sale after payment of legal fees and agent's commission was about $745,000. the wife agrees/disagrees. the husband says that he applied $50,000 or $60,000 from the early release of retention money for a job in order to initially fund the purchase of [suburb c]. the wife says both parties applied for this release. issue as to whether the wife consented to the property at [b street, suburb c] being put in the husband's sole name. the husband asserts that the wife received through their son [mr h] lump sums of money that were borrowed for the purpose of the development of the [suburb c] property. the wife denies this. the wife asserts that the husband received personal benefit of sums borrowed for the development of [suburb c]. the husband denies this. the husband says that $98,308.23 was drawn from his superannuation and applied to the development of [suburb c]. the wife agrees as to quantum, but not the purposes for which it is alleged it was applied. issue as to the amounts (if any) that the wife says she paid towards the costs of the development of [suburb c] and the funds borrowed in respect of the development of [suburb c]. issue as to the amounts that the husband says he paid towards the costs of the development of [suburb c] and the funds borrowed in respect of the development of [suburb c]. issue as to the allegations of sole contribution (apart from the funds arising from the sale of [suburb l]) by the husband to the development of the [suburb c] property. issue as to asserted contributions to the parties' children, including adult children by the husband. wife's allegation of family violence by the husband towards the wife - denied by the husband. wife's allegation of waste through gambling - denied by the husband.[21]
chronology
date
event
1958
husband born
1964
wife born
1983
parties marry
1986
parties incorporate q pty ltd
1987-2009
parties owned and operated a number of businesses
1987
ms g born
parties purchase block of land at k street, suburb l, ("k street”) for $42,000 and build house
1988
following an incidence of violence where the husband slapped the wife across the face, causing her nose to bleed, then pushed the wife to the ground and started kicking her with both feet, the wife left the parties’ home and went to a women’s refuge. she did not go to the police and returned to the family home after a few months
mr h born
1994
q pty ltd purchases r street, suburb s for $77,000
1996
mr j born
1997
k street sold for $295,000
parties purchase block of land at m street, suburb l for $155,000 (“suburb l”) and build house
1999
q pty ltd sells suburb s property for $115,000
2002 - 2010
t street, suburb u purchased by parties and another couple through v pty ltd. the suburb u land had development approval at the time of purchase. the land was developed with a number of units being built, with several being sold between 2004 and 2006. two of the remaining 4 were then held by the parties, the last of which was sold by the parties in 2010.
the land was developed with a number of units being built, with several being sold between 2004 and 2006. two of the remaining 4 were then held by the parties, the last of which was sold by the parties in 2010.
2006
wife qualifies in a new industry
2009
wife and ms g open up a business which runs for about 3 years
husband accuses wife of stealing money
suburb l sold for $765,000 (net $745,000) parties purchase b street, suburb c for $780,000 in husband’s sole name
parties purchase b street, suburb c for $780,000 in husband’s sole name
2010
following the husband’s threat to kill her and running to hide from the husband, the wife sought the assistance of the police. the police attended the parties’ home and told the husband to leave. the wife, being frightened of the husband after the police intervention, left the family home and moved to a refuge. ms g then moved in with the maternal grandmother, while mr j and mr h remained living in the husband.
council approval to build shed and house at suburb c obtained shed completed in about 2-3 months
shed completed in about 2-3 months
net proceeds of $140,000 from suburb u development paid into husband’s account, used to build shed at suburb c
shed at suburb c completed
2011
wife stays at a refuge, presumably after fleeing family violence
2011/2012
husband takes up work in perth, western australia
2012
wife leaves the family home and returns to live in a women’s shelter
wife commences business “f business”
2013
husband again takes up work in perth, western australia
wife travels to perth to spend time with husband, when husband threatens that if she does not return the money he will kill her.
the husband attends the suburb c property unannounced, wife is frightened and seeks assistance from police. weapons owned by the husband are seized by the police and a provisional avo is made.
wife arranges meeting with husband and forensic accountant, at which mr h is present (and two security guards). the husband verbally abuses the wife and the wife is frightened. the purpose of the meeting was to discuss where the “missing” money had gone.
interim advo issued.
husband takes out first loan for suburb c property for $250,000.
2014
husband purchased land in country x.
husband enters wife’s bedroom and chokes her by placing both of his hands around her throat. he then hits her on the side of the head with closed fists. the wife took herself to cc hospital after the assault, and attended again the following day. she then went to a women’s refuge.
early 2015
husband withdraws $98,308 from his superannuation.
2015
there was another incident of physical violence by the husband towards the wife and she again left the family home. she returned to the refuge and remained there for 3 ½ months, until she moved in with her mother.
2015/2016
wife moved back into shed on suburb c property. both parties lived at suburb c between the shed and the house.
2017/2018
second loan for suburb c property taken out for $309,757.
2018
husband travels overseas.
third loan for suburb c property taken out for $853,577.
2019
the husband threatened the wife by raising his fist at her, causing her to leave the residence and spend the evening at her brother’s home. interim avo protecting wife issued, husband defendant. date of separation parties residing at suburb c property (with ms g and mr j) at time of separation, husband remains living at property after separation.
interim avo protecting wife issued, husband defendant. date of separation parties residing at suburb c property (with ms g and mr j) at time of separation, husband remains living at property after separation.
date of separation parties residing at suburb c property (with ms g and mr j) at time of separation, husband remains living at property after separation.
parties residing at suburb c property (with ms g and mr j) at time of separation, husband remains living at property after separation.
final avo protecting wife issued, husband defendant
order for sale of suburb c, contracts exchanged.
2020
deposit from sale of suburb c released, parties received $182,500 each
27 july 2020
husband receives $13,431 in accordance with orders of 12 november 2019
2021
suburb c sale completes, sale price over $4,000,000
mortgage over suburb c paid out in full and discharged: $967,743
contribution based assessment  the parties agree that $140,000 was used to pay for the cost of the build of the shed, but it is not clear on the evidence if this was the entire cost, only part of the cost or less than the cost, and whether this amount represented a saving by virtue of the husband doing some of the work, (b) there is no evidence whatsoever as to what the house cost the parties to build, and whether again, this represented a saving to the parties by virtue of the husband doing some of the work. there is evidence in the husband’s case that there were payments totalling $163,812 withdrawn from the nab mortgage account and a nab savings account, both of which were operated by the husband and mr h, to build the house at suburb c, and (c) the da for the subdivision of the suburb c property cost $120,000 with an additional $30,000 for the heritage report. it is not clear on the evidence whether this was the entire cost, and if not, what the entire cost was.   there is no evidence whatsoever as to what the house cost the parties to build, and whether again, this represented a saving to the parties by virtue of the husband doing some of the work. there is evidence in the husband’s case that there were payments totalling $163,812 withdrawn from the nab mortgage account and a nab savings account, both of which were operated by the husband and mr h, to build the house at suburb c, and (c) the da for the subdivision of the suburb c property cost $120,000 with an additional $30,000 for the heritage report. it is not clear on the evidence whether this was the entire cost, and if not, what the entire cost was.   the da for the subdivision of the suburb c property cost $120,000 with an additional $30,000 for the heritage report. it is not clear on the evidence whether this was the entire cost, and if not, what the entire cost was.
future needs
conclusion as to overall adjustment
$1,592,948
$1,671,573
$1,153,450
$1,210,450
costs
conclusion
associate: dated: 8 may 2023
dated: 8 may 2023
[1] [2012] hca 52; (2012) 247 clr 108.[2] [2013] famcafc 116 (“bevan”).[3] [2014] famcafc 91 (“chapman”).[4] [2014] famcafc 203 (“scott”).[5] russell & russell [1999] famca 1875; teal & teal [2010] famcafc 120.[6] bevan at [86].[7] kennon & kennon [1997] famca 27 (“kennon”).[8] kennon.[9] [2003] famca 905 (“s & s”).[10] s & s at [42].[11] britt & britt [2017] famcafc 27 (“britt”).[12] britt at [74] cited in horrigan & horrigan (no.2) [2018] famca 937at [231].[13] s & s at [47]-[48].[14] the findings include the matters agreed to by the parties.[15] later referred to as $140,000 as agreed between the parties. [16] husband’s affidavit filed 6 may 2022 at [65]-[69].[17] see in particular britt & britt [2017] famcafc 27; (2017) flc 93-764 at [74]; sweet & sweet [2022] fedcfc 676 at [247].[18] husband’s affidavit filed 6 may 2022 at [70]-[72].[19] [1992] famca 69[20] [1992] famca 2[21] joint statement of issues, emailed to the court on 17 may 2022.[22] see husband’s affidavit filed 6 may 2022 at 41.[23] wife’s affidavit at [59].[24] see exhibit 3.[25] which includes the contents of the parties’ former home, see exhibit 3.