last updated: 19 october 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
otero & kasun [2023] fedcfamc2f 527
orders
the court orders that:  before the mother makes any major long term decision in respect of the children, the mother will: (i) provide the father with all relevant information and documentation in relation to the issue, (ii) inform the father in writing of her proposal for the children, including the reason(s) why she believes the proposal is in the children’s best interest, (iii) provide the father with any name and contact details as may be relevant, and (iv) give the father at least seven (7) days to consider the mother’s proposal and respond, before the mother proceeds with her proposal, and (v) if the father responds within seven (7) days of receipt of the mother’s proposal, the mother will consider the father’s views and advise him of either her acceptance or rejection of the father’s views.   provide the father with all relevant information and documentation in relation to the issue, (ii) inform the father in writing of her proposal for the children, including the reason(s) why she believes the proposal is in the children’s best interest, (iii) provide the father with any name and contact details as may be relevant, and (iv) give the father at least seven (7) days to consider the mother’s proposal and respond, before the mother proceeds with her proposal, and (v) if the father responds within seven (7) days of receipt of the mother’s proposal, the mother will consider the father’s views and advise him of either her acceptance or rejection of the father’s views.  ) inform the father in writing of her proposal for the children, including the reason(s) why she believes the proposal is in the children’s best interest, (iii) provide the father with any name and contact details as may be relevant, and (iv) give the father at least seven (7) days to consider the mother’s proposal and respond, before the mother proceeds with her proposal, and (v) if the father responds within seven (7) days of receipt of the mother’s proposal, the mother will consider the father’s views and advise him of either her acceptance or rejection of the father’s views.  i) provide the father with any name and contact details as may be relevant, and (iv) give the father at least seven (7) days to consider the mother’s proposal and respond, before the mother proceeds with her proposal, and (v) if the father responds within seven (7) days of receipt of the mother’s proposal, the mother will consider the father’s views and advise him of either her acceptance or rejection of the father’s views.  ) give the father at least seven (7) days to consider the mother’s proposal and respond, before the mother proceeds with her proposal, and (v) if the father responds within seven (7) days of receipt of the mother’s proposal, the mother will consider the father’s views and advise him of either her acceptance or rejection of the father’s views.   if the father responds within seven (7) days of receipt of the mother’s proposal, the mother will consider the father’s views and advise him of either her acceptance or rejection of the father’s views.   commencing the last weekend of the calendar month in which the court makes these orders, the children spend (6) supervised visits with the father for three (3) hours each with such time to occur on both the saturday and sunday of the last weekend of the calendar month and at a place and time to be agreed upon by the parties with such time to occur within a 15 km radius of the melbourne central business district with the cost of such supervision to be shared equally by the parties. (b) thereafter, the father spend time with the children in city b once per month from 11:00am saturday to 5:00pm sunday for a period of four (4) months. (c) thereafter, the children will spend time with the father during the school holiday periods as follows: (i) in the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for the second week with the father at his residence as long as such residence is within the commonwealth of australia. (ii) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.   thereafter, the father spend time with the children in city b once per month from 11:00am saturday to 5:00pm sunday for a period of four (4) months. (c) thereafter, the children will spend time with the father during the school holiday periods as follows: (i) in the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for the second week with the father at his residence as long as such residence is within the commonwealth of australia. (ii) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.   thereafter, the children will spend time with the father during the school holiday periods as follows: (i) in the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for the second week with the father at his residence as long as such residence is within the commonwealth of australia. (ii) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.   in the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for the second week with the father at his residence as long as such residence is within the commonwealth of australia. (ii) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.  ) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.  i) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.  ) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.   both parties shall follow all reasonable requests and directions given by the nominated supervision service, (b) the parties be equally responsible for all costs payable to the nominated supervision service including the costs of obtaining contact reports, and (c) both parties shall complete and return to the nominated supervision service all intake/enrolment paperwork within seven (7) days of receiving same.   the parties be equally responsible for all costs payable to the nominated supervision service including the costs of obtaining contact reports, and (c) both parties shall complete and return to the nominated supervision service all intake/enrolment paperwork within seven (7) days of receiving same.   both parties shall complete and return to the nominated supervision service all intake/enrolment paperwork within seven (7) days of receiving same.   each monday, and thursday from 5:30pm until 6:00pm, and (b) the mother do all things reasonably necessary to ensure the children are provided with a device on which the calls can take place and the children are provided with privacy for the duration of their call.   the mother do all things reasonably necessary to ensure the children are provided with a device on which the calls can take place and the children are provided with privacy for the duration of their call.   that within 14 days the father shall attend upon his current mental health provider. (b) the father shall do all things reasonably necessary to obtain a written report/letter from the abovementioned mental health provider as to whether the father requires further treatment including anger management counselling and if so, the frequency of same and confirmation that the father is compliant with any treatment he may be undergoing with that mental health provider. the father shall provide the said mental health practitioner a copy of these orders, reasons for decision and a copy of the family reports dated 6 october 2022 and 4 march 2022. the report/letter shall acknowledge that the author has been provided with and read these orders, reasons for decision and the said family reports. (c) on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. the mother shall be and is hereby authorised to communicate with the father’s mental health provider and request reports (not more than once every 6 month period) as to the father’s compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (d) the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) and order 6(d) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   the father shall do all things reasonably necessary to obtain a written report/letter from the abovementioned mental health provider as to whether the father requires further treatment including anger management counselling and if so, the frequency of same and confirmation that the father is compliant with any treatment he may be undergoing with that mental health provider. the father shall provide the said mental health practitioner a copy of these orders, reasons for decision and a copy of the family reports dated 6 october 2022 and 4 march 2022. the report/letter shall acknowledge that the author has been provided with and read these orders, reasons for decision and the said family reports. (c) on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. the mother shall be and is hereby authorised to communicate with the father’s mental health provider and request reports (not more than once every 6 month period) as to the father’s compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (d) the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) and order 6(d) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. the mother shall be and is hereby authorised to communicate with the father’s mental health provider and request reports (not more than once every 6 month period) as to the father’s compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (d) the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) and order 6(d) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) and order 6(d) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) and order 6(d) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   the parties shall do all acts and things and sign all documents as are requested by c family centre to give effect to these orders. (b) despite order 3 above that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties at c family centre the children shall recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency and upon such conditions as recommended by c family centre. (c) that the independent children’s lawyer copy and provide to c family centre a copy of these orders, reasons for decision, a copy of the family reports dated 6 october 2022 and 4 march 2022 and a copy of the subpoenaed material produced by e services as background material to assist them in providing family therapy to the parties and the children. (d) that the parties shall equally pay the costs of c family centre providing its services in accordance with these orders.   despite order 3 above that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties at c family centre the children shall recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency and upon such conditions as recommended by c family centre. (c) that the independent children’s lawyer copy and provide to c family centre a copy of these orders, reasons for decision, a copy of the family reports dated 6 october 2022 and 4 march 2022 and a copy of the subpoenaed material produced by e services as background material to assist them in providing family therapy to the parties and the children. (d) that the parties shall equally pay the costs of c family centre providing its services in accordance with these orders.   that the independent children’s lawyer copy and provide to c family centre a copy of these orders, reasons for decision, a copy of the family reports dated 6 october 2022 and 4 march 2022 and a copy of the subpoenaed material produced by e services as background material to assist them in providing family therapy to the parties and the children. (d) that the parties shall equally pay the costs of c family centre providing its services in accordance with these orders.   that the parties shall equally pay the costs of c family centre providing its services in accordance with these orders.   discussing these orders or matters related to the parenting proceedings with the children, (b) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent.   abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent.
reasons for judgment
myers j:  that the mother cause the children to reside in the greater metropolitan sydney area within 28 days. (2) that in the event that the mother refuses to relocate the children’s residence back to the greater sydney metropolitan area in compliance with order 1 than the children live with the father. (3) that the parties do all things necessary to engage the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (herein referred to as ‘the children’) with an appropriate and qualified family therapeutic service based in the sydney area for the purpose of engaging in family therapy with a view toward re-establishing their relationship with their father. (4) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties as per order 3, the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended such service. (5) that leave be granted to the therapist from the therapist appointed per order 3 to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (6) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by the therapist appointed per order 3 in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (7) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 7.1 for two months each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until 5pm sunday 7.2 after the two-month period in order 7.1 for a two month period, each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until the commencement of school on monday or 9am if the monday falls in a school holiday period, 7.3 after the two-month period in order 7.2, thereafter, each alternate weekend from 5pm thursday until the start of school the following tuesday or 9am if the tuesday falls in a school holiday period (8) in the event that the children remain living in city b, then the following orders apply. (9) that the parties do all things necessary to engage the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (herein referred to as ‘the children’) with c family centre (d street, city b vic) for the purpose of engaging in family therapy with a view toward re-establishing their relationship with their father. (10) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties at c family centre the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended by c family centre. (11) that leave be granted to the therapist from c family centre to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (12) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by c family centre in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (13) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.   that in the event that the mother refuses to relocate the children’s residence back to the greater sydney metropolitan area in compliance with order 1 than the children live with the father. (3) that the parties do all things necessary to engage the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (herein referred to as ‘the children’) with an appropriate and qualified family therapeutic service based in the sydney area for the purpose of engaging in family therapy with a view toward re-establishing their relationship with their father. (4) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties as per order 3, the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended such service. (5) that leave be granted to the therapist from the therapist appointed per order 3 to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (6) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by the therapist appointed per order 3 in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (7) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 7.1 for two months each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until 5pm sunday 7.2 after the two-month period in order 7.1 for a two month period, each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until the commencement of school on monday or 9am if the monday falls in a school holiday period, 7.3 after the two-month period in order 7.2, thereafter, each alternate weekend from 5pm thursday until the start of school the following tuesday or 9am if the tuesday falls in a school holiday period (8) in the event that the children remain living in city b, then the following orders apply. (9) that the parties do all things necessary to engage the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (herein referred to as ‘the children’) with c family centre (d street, city b vic) for the purpose of engaging in family therapy with a view toward re-establishing their relationship with their father. (10) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties at c family centre the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended by c family centre. (11) that leave be granted to the therapist from c family centre to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (12) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by c family centre in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (13) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.   that the parties do all things necessary to engage the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (herein referred to as ‘the children’) with an appropriate and qualified family therapeutic service based in the sydney area for the purpose of engaging in family therapy with a view toward re-establishing their relationship with their father. (4) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties as per order 3, the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended such service. (5) that leave be granted to the therapist from the therapist appointed per order 3 to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (6) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by the therapist appointed per order 3 in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (7) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 7.1 for two months each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until 5pm sunday 7.2 after the two-month period in order 7.1 for a two month period, each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until the commencement of school on monday or 9am if the monday falls in a school holiday period, 7.3 after the two-month period in order 7.2, thereafter, each alternate weekend from 5pm thursday until the start of school the following tuesday or 9am if the tuesday falls in a school holiday period (8) in the event that the children remain living in city b, then the following orders apply. (9) that the parties do all things necessary to engage the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (herein referred to as ‘the children’) with c family centre (d street, city b vic) for the purpose of engaging in family therapy with a view toward re-establishing their relationship with their father. (10) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties at c family centre the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended by c family centre. (11) that leave be granted to the therapist from c family centre to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (12) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by c family centre in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (13) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.   that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties as per order 3, the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended such service. (5) that leave be granted to the therapist from the therapist appointed per order 3 to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (6) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by the therapist appointed per order 3 in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (7) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 7.1 for two months each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until 5pm sunday 7.2 after the two-month period in order 7.1 for a two month period, each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until the commencement of school on monday or 9am if the monday falls in a school holiday period, 7.3 after the two-month period in order 7.2, thereafter, each alternate weekend from 5pm thursday until the start of school the following tuesday or 9am if the tuesday falls in a school holiday period (8) in the event that the children remain living in city b, then the following orders apply. (9) that the parties do all things necessary to engage the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (herein referred to as ‘the children’) with c family centre (d street, city b vic) for the purpose of engaging in family therapy with a view toward re-establishing their relationship with their father. (10) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties at c family centre the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended by c family centre. (11) that leave be granted to the therapist from c family centre to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (12) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by c family centre in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (13) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.   that leave be granted to the therapist from the therapist appointed per order 3 to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (6) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by the therapist appointed per order 3 in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (7) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 7.1 for two months each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until 5pm sunday 7.2 after the two-month period in order 7.1 for a two month period, each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until the commencement of school on monday or 9am if the monday falls in a school holiday period, 7.3 after the two-month period in order 7.2, thereafter, each alternate weekend from 5pm thursday until the start of school the following tuesday or 9am if the tuesday falls in a school holiday period (8) in the event that the children remain living in city b, then the following orders apply. (9) that the parties do all things necessary to engage the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (herein referred to as ‘the children’) with c family centre (d street, city b vic) for the purpose of engaging in family therapy with a view toward re-establishing their relationship with their father. (10) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties at c family centre the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended by c family centre. (11) that leave be granted to the therapist from c family centre to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (12) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by c family centre in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (13) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.   at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by the therapist appointed per order 3 in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (7) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 7.1 for two months each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until 5pm sunday 7.2 after the two-month period in order 7.1 for a two month period, each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until the commencement of school on monday or 9am if the monday falls in a school holiday period, 7.3 after the two-month period in order 7.2, thereafter, each alternate weekend from 5pm thursday until the start of school the following tuesday or 9am if the tuesday falls in a school holiday period (8) in the event that the children remain living in city b, then the following orders apply. (9) that the parties do all things necessary to engage the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (herein referred to as ‘the children’) with c family centre (d street, city b vic) for the purpose of engaging in family therapy with a view toward re-establishing their relationship with their father. (10) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties at c family centre the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended by c family centre. (11) that leave be granted to the therapist from c family centre to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (12) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by c family centre in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (13) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.   after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 7.1 for two months each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until 5pm sunday 7.2 after the two-month period in order 7.1 for a two month period, each alternate weekend from 5pm friday until the commencement of school on monday or 9am if the monday falls in a school holiday period, 7.3 after the two-month period in order 7.2, thereafter, each alternate weekend from 5pm thursday until the start of school the following tuesday or 9am if the tuesday falls in a school holiday period (8) in the event that the children remain living in city b, then the following orders apply. (9) that the parties do all things necessary to engage the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (herein referred to as ‘the children’) with c family centre (d street, city b vic) for the purpose of engaging in family therapy with a view toward re-establishing their relationship with their father. (10) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties at c family centre the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended by c family centre. (11) that leave be granted to the therapist from c family centre to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (12) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by c family centre in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (13) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.   in the event that the children remain living in city b, then the following orders apply. (9) that the parties do all things necessary to engage the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (herein referred to as ‘the children’) with c family centre (d street, city b vic) for the purpose of engaging in family therapy with a view toward re-establishing their relationship with their father. (10) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties at c family centre the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended by c family centre. (11) that leave be granted to the therapist from c family centre to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (12) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by c family centre in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (13) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.   that the parties do all things necessary to engage the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (herein referred to as ‘the children’) with c family centre (d street, city b vic) for the purpose of engaging in family therapy with a view toward re-establishing their relationship with their father. (10) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties at c family centre the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended by c family centre. (11) that leave be granted to the therapist from c family centre to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (12) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by c family centre in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (13) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.  ) that after a period of 3 months subject to the recommendations of the therapist engaged by the parties at c family centre the children recommence spending time with their father at times and frequency recommended by c family centre. (11) that leave be granted to the therapist from c family centre to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (12) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by c family centre in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (13) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.  ) that leave be granted to the therapist from c family centre to receive material from e services concerning the parties engagement with the service including any documents produced in response to a subpoena to the court. (12) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by c family centre in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (13) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.  ) at the expiration of 6 months a report be requested to be prepared by c family centre in relation to the progress of the therapeutic assistance and the children’s willingness to spend time with the father. (13) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.  ) after 6 months of therapeutic assistance the children spend time with the father as follows, 13.1 on one occasion during the school term on a saturday as agreed between the parties but failing agreement the 5th weekend from 9am until 4pm at an appropriate children’s contact centre. (14) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.  ) that this matter be relisted for further directions at a date suitable to the court after 6 months. (15) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.  ) that liberty be granted to all parties to relist the matter on 7 days’ notice.   that the mother has sole parental responsibility for the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (“the children”). (2) that the children live with the mother in city b. (3) that the children spend no time with the father. (4) that the children shall communicate with the father via skype/zoom with the father to initiate the calls as follows: (a) each tuesday, and thursday from 5.30pm until 6pm. (5) that the mother shall ensure the father is notified of any serious injury or illness or medical emergency in relation to the children, or any of them, as soon as practicable via text message. (6) the mother and father and their servants and agents are restrained from: (a) discussing these orders or matters related to the parenting proceedings with the children, (b) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent.   that the children live with the mother in city b. (3) that the children spend no time with the father. (4) that the children shall communicate with the father via skype/zoom with the father to initiate the calls as follows: (a) each tuesday, and thursday from 5.30pm until 6pm. (5) that the mother shall ensure the father is notified of any serious injury or illness or medical emergency in relation to the children, or any of them, as soon as practicable via text message. (6) the mother and father and their servants and agents are restrained from: (a) discussing these orders or matters related to the parenting proceedings with the children, (b) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent.   that the children spend no time with the father. (4) that the children shall communicate with the father via skype/zoom with the father to initiate the calls as follows: (a) each tuesday, and thursday from 5.30pm until 6pm. (5) that the mother shall ensure the father is notified of any serious injury or illness or medical emergency in relation to the children, or any of them, as soon as practicable via text message. (6) the mother and father and their servants and agents are restrained from: (a) discussing these orders or matters related to the parenting proceedings with the children, (b) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent.   that the children shall communicate with the father via skype/zoom with the father to initiate the calls as follows: (a) each tuesday, and thursday from 5.30pm until 6pm. (5) that the mother shall ensure the father is notified of any serious injury or illness or medical emergency in relation to the children, or any of them, as soon as practicable via text message. (6) the mother and father and their servants and agents are restrained from: (a) discussing these orders or matters related to the parenting proceedings with the children, (b) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent.   each tuesday, and thursday from 5.30pm until 6pm.   that the mother shall ensure the father is notified of any serious injury or illness or medical emergency in relation to the children, or any of them, as soon as practicable via text message. (6) the mother and father and their servants and agents are restrained from: (a) discussing these orders or matters related to the parenting proceedings with the children, (b) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent.   the mother and father and their servants and agents are restrained from: (a) discussing these orders or matters related to the parenting proceedings with the children, (b) abusing, insulting, belittling, rebuking or otherwise denigrating the other parent.   that the mother has sole parental responsibility for the children x born in 2015 and y born in 2016 (“the children”) and for that purpose: (a) before the mother makes any major long term decision in respect of the children, the mother will: (i) provide the father with all relevant information and documentation in relation to the issue, (ii) inform the father in writing of her proposal for the children, including the reason(s) why she believes the proposal is in the children’s best interest, (iii) provide the father with any name and contact details as may be relevant, and (iv) give the father at least 7 days to consider the mother’s proposal and respond, before the mother proceeds with her proposal, and (b) if the father responds within 7 days of receipt of the mother’s proposal, the mother will consider the father’s views and advise him of either her acceptance or rejection of the father’s views. (2) that the children live with the mother in city b. (3) subject to the father’s compliance with order 6 below, the children spend time with the father by agreement and failing agreement as follows: (a) commencing the last weekend of the calendar month in which the court makes these orders, the children spend (6) supervised visits with the father for 3 hours each with such time to occur on both the saturday and sunday of the last weekend of the calendar month and at a place and time to be agreed upon by the parties with such time to occur within a 15 km radius of the melbourne central business district with the cost of such supervision to be shared equally by the parties. (b) at the end of 6 supervised visits the father is to provide to the mother written confirmation from his treating psychiatrist or psychologist that the father is: (i) attending upon all recommended therapy, (ii) is compliant with any prescriptions for his mental health, and (iii) if he is in ongoing therapy, a description of the frequency of any sessions that the father will be recommended to attend upon in the future. (c) thereafter, the father spend time with the children in city b once per month from 11.00am saturday to 5.00pm sunday for a period of 4 months. (d) thereafter, the children will spend time with the father during the school holiday periods as follows: (i) in the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for the second week with the father at his residence as long as such residence is within the commonwealth of australia. (ii) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport. (4) that in order to facilitate the child spending time with the mother in accordance with order 3 above, the parties shall attend to the following: (a) both parties shall follow all reasonable requests and directions given by the nominated supervision service, (b) the parties be equally responsible for all costs payable to the nominated supervision service including the costs of obtaining contact reports, and (c) both parties shall complete and return to the nominated supervision service all intake/enrolment paperwork within 7 days of receiving same. (5) commencing in the first week following the children’s first visit with the father in accordance with order 3(a) the children shall communicate with the father via skype/zoom with the father to initiate the calls as follows: (a) each monday, and thursday from 5.30pm until 6pm and the mother do all things reasonably necessary to ensure the children are provided with a device on which the calls can take place and the children are provided with privacy for the duration of their call.   before the mother makes any major long term decision in respect of the children, the mother will: (i) provide the father with all relevant information and documentation in relation to the issue, (ii) inform the father in writing of her proposal for the children, including the reason(s) why she believes the proposal is in the children’s best interest, (iii) provide the father with any name and contact details as may be relevant, and (iv) give the father at least 7 days to consider the mother’s proposal and respond, before the mother proceeds with her proposal, and (b) if the father responds within 7 days of receipt of the mother’s proposal, the mother will consider the father’s views and advise him of either her acceptance or rejection of the father’s views.   provide the father with all relevant information and documentation in relation to the issue, (ii) inform the father in writing of her proposal for the children, including the reason(s) why she believes the proposal is in the children’s best interest, (iii) provide the father with any name and contact details as may be relevant, and (iv) give the father at least 7 days to consider the mother’s proposal and respond, before the mother proceeds with her proposal, and  ) inform the father in writing of her proposal for the children, including the reason(s) why she believes the proposal is in the children’s best interest, (iii) provide the father with any name and contact details as may be relevant, and (iv) give the father at least 7 days to consider the mother’s proposal and respond, before the mother proceeds with her proposal, and  i) provide the father with any name and contact details as may be relevant, and (iv) give the father at least 7 days to consider the mother’s proposal and respond, before the mother proceeds with her proposal, and  ) give the father at least 7 days to consider the mother’s proposal and respond, before the mother proceeds with her proposal, and   if the father responds within 7 days of receipt of the mother’s proposal, the mother will consider the father’s views and advise him of either her acceptance or rejection of the father’s views.   that the children live with the mother in city b. (3) subject to the father’s compliance with order 6 below, the children spend time with the father by agreement and failing agreement as follows: (a) commencing the last weekend of the calendar month in which the court makes these orders, the children spend (6) supervised visits with the father for 3 hours each with such time to occur on both the saturday and sunday of the last weekend of the calendar month and at a place and time to be agreed upon by the parties with such time to occur within a 15 km radius of the melbourne central business district with the cost of such supervision to be shared equally by the parties. (b) at the end of 6 supervised visits the father is to provide to the mother written confirmation from his treating psychiatrist or psychologist that the father is: (i) attending upon all recommended therapy, (ii) is compliant with any prescriptions for his mental health, and (iii) if he is in ongoing therapy, a description of the frequency of any sessions that the father will be recommended to attend upon in the future. (c) thereafter, the father spend time with the children in city b once per month from 11.00am saturday to 5.00pm sunday for a period of 4 months. (d) thereafter, the children will spend time with the father during the school holiday periods as follows: (i) in the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for the second week with the father at his residence as long as such residence is within the commonwealth of australia. (ii) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport. (4) that in order to facilitate the child spending time with the mother in accordance with order 3 above, the parties shall attend to the following: (a) both parties shall follow all reasonable requests and directions given by the nominated supervision service, (b) the parties be equally responsible for all costs payable to the nominated supervision service including the costs of obtaining contact reports, and (c) both parties shall complete and return to the nominated supervision service all intake/enrolment paperwork within 7 days of receiving same. (5) commencing in the first week following the children’s first visit with the father in accordance with order 3(a) the children shall communicate with the father via skype/zoom with the father to initiate the calls as follows: (a) each monday, and thursday from 5.30pm until 6pm and the mother do all things reasonably necessary to ensure the children are provided with a device on which the calls can take place and the children are provided with privacy for the duration of their call.   subject to the father’s compliance with order 6 below, the children spend time with the father by agreement and failing agreement as follows: (a) commencing the last weekend of the calendar month in which the court makes these orders, the children spend (6) supervised visits with the father for 3 hours each with such time to occur on both the saturday and sunday of the last weekend of the calendar month and at a place and time to be agreed upon by the parties with such time to occur within a 15 km radius of the melbourne central business district with the cost of such supervision to be shared equally by the parties. (b) at the end of 6 supervised visits the father is to provide to the mother written confirmation from his treating psychiatrist or psychologist that the father is: (i) attending upon all recommended therapy, (ii) is compliant with any prescriptions for his mental health, and (iii) if he is in ongoing therapy, a description of the frequency of any sessions that the father will be recommended to attend upon in the future. (c) thereafter, the father spend time with the children in city b once per month from 11.00am saturday to 5.00pm sunday for a period of 4 months. (d) thereafter, the children will spend time with the father during the school holiday periods as follows: (i) in the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for the second week with the father at his residence as long as such residence is within the commonwealth of australia. (ii) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport. (4) that in order to facilitate the child spending time with the mother in accordance with order 3 above, the parties shall attend to the following: (a) both parties shall follow all reasonable requests and directions given by the nominated supervision service, (b) the parties be equally responsible for all costs payable to the nominated supervision service including the costs of obtaining contact reports, and (c) both parties shall complete and return to the nominated supervision service all intake/enrolment paperwork within 7 days of receiving same. (5) commencing in the first week following the children’s first visit with the father in accordance with order 3(a) the children shall communicate with the father via skype/zoom with the father to initiate the calls as follows: (a) each monday, and thursday from 5.30pm until 6pm and the mother do all things reasonably necessary to ensure the children are provided with a device on which the calls can take place and the children are provided with privacy for the duration of their call.   commencing the last weekend of the calendar month in which the court makes these orders, the children spend (6) supervised visits with the father for 3 hours each with such time to occur on both the saturday and sunday of the last weekend of the calendar month and at a place and time to be agreed upon by the parties with such time to occur within a 15 km radius of the melbourne central business district with the cost of such supervision to be shared equally by the parties. (b) at the end of 6 supervised visits the father is to provide to the mother written confirmation from his treating psychiatrist or psychologist that the father is: (i) attending upon all recommended therapy, (ii) is compliant with any prescriptions for his mental health, and (iii) if he is in ongoing therapy, a description of the frequency of any sessions that the father will be recommended to attend upon in the future. (c) thereafter, the father spend time with the children in city b once per month from 11.00am saturday to 5.00pm sunday for a period of 4 months. (d) thereafter, the children will spend time with the father during the school holiday periods as follows: (i) in the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for the second week with the father at his residence as long as such residence is within the commonwealth of australia. (ii) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.   at the end of 6 supervised visits the father is to provide to the mother written confirmation from his treating psychiatrist or psychologist that the father is: (i) attending upon all recommended therapy, (ii) is compliant with any prescriptions for his mental health, and (iii) if he is in ongoing therapy, a description of the frequency of any sessions that the father will be recommended to attend upon in the future. (c) thereafter, the father spend time with the children in city b once per month from 11.00am saturday to 5.00pm sunday for a period of 4 months. (d) thereafter, the children will spend time with the father during the school holiday periods as follows: (i) in the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for the second week with the father at his residence as long as such residence is within the commonwealth of australia. (ii) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.   attending upon all recommended therapy, (ii) is compliant with any prescriptions for his mental health, and (iii) if he is in ongoing therapy, a description of the frequency of any sessions that the father will be recommended to attend upon in the future.  ) is compliant with any prescriptions for his mental health, and (iii) if he is in ongoing therapy, a description of the frequency of any sessions that the father will be recommended to attend upon in the future.  i) if he is in ongoing therapy, a description of the frequency of any sessions that the father will be recommended to attend upon in the future.   thereafter, the father spend time with the children in city b once per month from 11.00am saturday to 5.00pm sunday for a period of 4 months. (d) thereafter, the children will spend time with the father during the school holiday periods as follows: (i) in the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for the second week with the father at his residence as long as such residence is within the commonwealth of australia. (ii) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.   thereafter, the children will spend time with the father during the school holiday periods as follows: (i) in the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for the second week with the father at his residence as long as such residence is within the commonwealth of australia. (ii) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.   in the terms 1, 2 and 3 school holidays, for the second week with the father at his residence as long as such residence is within the commonwealth of australia. (ii) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.  ) in the first term 4 holiday period after the children have had 4 overnight visits with the father in accordance with order 3(c) the children spend time with the father for 10 nights as agreed between the parties and if not agreed, for (10) nights commencing on the first monday of january. (iii) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.  i) in the proceeding term 4 holiday periods, the children spend time with the father for the second half of the term 4 school holiday periods. (iv) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.  ) for the purposes of these orders, the parties each share the costs of the children’s flights to and from sydney for the purposes of the children’s time with the father and changeover on such occasions is to take place at the arrivals gate of sydney domestic airport and/or melbourne domestic airport.   that in order to facilitate the child spending time with the mother in accordance with order 3 above, the parties shall attend to the following: (a) both parties shall follow all reasonable requests and directions given by the nominated supervision service, (b) the parties be equally responsible for all costs payable to the nominated supervision service including the costs of obtaining contact reports, and (c) both parties shall complete and return to the nominated supervision service all intake/enrolment paperwork within 7 days of receiving same. (5) commencing in the first week following the children’s first visit with the father in accordance with order 3(a) the children shall communicate with the father via skype/zoom with the father to initiate the calls as follows: (a) each monday, and thursday from 5.30pm until 6pm and the mother do all things reasonably necessary to ensure the children are provided with a device on which the calls can take place and the children are provided with privacy for the duration of their call.   both parties shall follow all reasonable requests and directions given by the nominated supervision service, (b) the parties be equally responsible for all costs payable to the nominated supervision service including the costs of obtaining contact reports, and (c) both parties shall complete and return to the nominated supervision service all intake/enrolment paperwork within 7 days of receiving same.   the parties be equally responsible for all costs payable to the nominated supervision service including the costs of obtaining contact reports, and (c) both parties shall complete and return to the nominated supervision service all intake/enrolment paperwork within 7 days of receiving same.   both parties shall complete and return to the nominated supervision service all intake/enrolment paperwork within 7 days of receiving same.   commencing in the first week following the children’s first visit with the father in accordance with order 3(a) the children shall communicate with the father via skype/zoom with the father to initiate the calls as follows: (a) each monday, and thursday from 5.30pm until 6pm and the mother do all things reasonably necessary to ensure the children are provided with a device on which the calls can take place and the children are provided with privacy for the duration of their call.   each monday, and thursday from 5.30pm until 6pm
and the mother do all things reasonably necessary to ensure the children are provided with a device on which the calls can take place and the children are provided with privacy for the duration of their call.
with privacy for the duration of their call.   the father’s time with the children be conditional upon his compliance with the following:   that within 14 days the father shall attend upon his current mental health provider. (b) the father shall do all things reasonably necessary to obtain a written report/letter from the abovementioned mental health provider as to whether the father requires further treatment and if so, the frequency of same and confirmation that the father is compliant with any treatment he made be undergoing with that mental health provider. (c) on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. (d) the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   the father shall do all things reasonably necessary to obtain a written report/letter from the abovementioned mental health provider as to whether the father requires further treatment and if so, the frequency of same and confirmation that the father is compliant with any treatment he made be undergoing with that mental health provider. (c) on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. (d) the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. (d) the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   that the parties shall ensure the other party is notified of any serious injury or illness or medical emergency in relation to the children, or any of them, as soon as practicable via text message. (8) the mother and father and their servants and agents are restrained from:
by way of background:
you’re nothing but a fucking deadbeat. you’re a serious fucking drop kick. too focused on your piece-of-shit car. don’t come back to this house. i will make an arrangement when the children aren’t here to come get your shit. you come here and i will call the police, so fuck off.
10 minutes later the mother sent a further text message that provided:
most of your shit is at the front door. your hanging clothes, you can pick up tomorrow at lunchtime when i’m home, and i will take my keys back at the same time. you step foot onto my house and i will have you arrested.
mother: i’ve had them for the last two weeks, so yes, you are taking them friday. father: cry me a river. you spat the little cherubs out. no rest, eh.
the father was taken to another exchange:
mother: i sincerely apologise for ruining your life. i really am. can’t go back and change that. we have two children now, so can you please just focus on that. father: no. you just want time off. they’re hard work. you don’t give a fuck about the kids and any relationship they have with their dad. you use them as a pawn. you threatened to cut access twice these evening. you dropped them off with me to fuck off and go get your fuck on with – on whether with old mate here or old mate in [city f] or wherever you’ve duped poor idiot. i’m not an idiot. stop trying to pull the wool over my eyes, you f.
why is that? is it too fucking hard to pick them up when you pick him up? what shoes did he have to walk out in? so now because of your pure incompetence i have a crying child wanting his [g shoes]. that’s it. you’re no longer allowed to pick them up from day care. fucking hopeless. one fucking job and you can’t even do that.
i want my kids back and i will do whatever it takes to get them back and if i ever see you touch the kids i will bash you.
mr o’brien: so you agree that you sent that message, do you, sir? father: ---in response to your client’s email – text. i see. i see?--- mr obrien: sir, do you recall saying: fuck that dog – father: in respect of [mr h]? mr o’brien: fuck that dog idiot. must have a brain injury to put up with you. father: that’s pretty savage. sounds like something i might say, yes. i don’t know. i don’t remember it exactly, but yes.
mr cohen: the father never granted you permission to move - - -? mother: ---no. mr cohen: - - - did he? mother: ---no, he did not.
i believe that he has such a hatred for me that given the opportunity, he will harm those kids, and i don’t want my kids being a statistic and have them thrown off the [o bridge], so, you know, i want to protect my kids and do everything i can to make sure that they’re safe, and i don’t think they’re safe with him at all. i’m sorry. (transcript 8 nov’ 2022, p.290).
ms carter: you were asked by mr cohen about the father’s behaviour towards the children a bit earlier this afternoon, and it was suggested to you that in terms of [mr otero]’s conduct towards the children, there has been no allegations or suggestions made by you that he has been abusive towards the children other than that event in late 2020, is that right? mother: ---correct. ms carter: and other than the father’s conduct which you saw in court in august and the information that you’ve read in the family report, there has been nothing between august and today that would suggest to you that the father is at risk of physical harm to the children? mother: ---not physical harm, no.
after the observation, the cce said to [mr otero] that the experience must have been difficult. [mr otero] called the cce an “oxygen thief” and told her that it was another example of her “fucking incompetence.” he said that there was no benefit to the observation and there is no accountability. he stated that he did not know “what you (the cce) expected to achieve by deliberately upsetting the children.” he said that if he did not participate it is on him, but did the cce understand that the children drove three hours to attend the appointment and [y] gets car sick after an hour and a half in the car. the cce concluded the assessment with [mr otero] at this time.
whilst it is clear, in the independent children’s lawyer’s submission, that the father’s conduct in the interviews and in court was offensive and disrespectful, the father’s behaviour also needs to be considered in the following context:   the father’s actions did not take place in front of the children, (2) the father has not seen children in 2 years, (3) there has not been compliance with past orders providing for time between the children and the father, (4) the mother relocated interstate with the children without notice to the father, (5) the father gave evidence to the effect that that he has been extremely stressed as a result of these proceedings and parenting dispute.
whilst this does not excuse the father’s behaviour, it provides some context for such behaviour when it might otherwise be given greater emphasis when examined in isolation.
the father’s time with the children be conditional upon his compliance with the following: that within 14 days the father shall attend upon his current mental health provider. the father shall do all things reasonably necessary to obtain a written report/letter from the abovementioned mental health provider as to whether the father requires further treatment and if so, the frequency of same and confirmation that the father is compliant with any treatment he made be undergoing with that mental health provider. on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   that within 14 days the father shall attend upon his current mental health provider. (b) the father shall do all things reasonably necessary to obtain a written report/letter from the abovementioned mental health provider as to whether the father requires further treatment including anger management counselling and if so, the frequency of same and confirmation that the father is compliant with any treatment he made be undergoing with that mental health provider. the father shall provide the said mental health practitioner a copy of these orders, reasons for decision and a copy of the family reports dated 6 october 2022 and 4 march 2022. the report/letter shall acknowledge that the author has been provided with and read these orders, reasons for decision and the said family reports. (c) on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. the mother shall be and is authorised to communicate with the father’s mental health provider and request reports(not more than once every 6 month period) as to the father’s compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (d) the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) and order 6(d) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   the father shall do all things reasonably necessary to obtain a written report/letter from the abovementioned mental health provider as to whether the father requires further treatment including anger management counselling and if so, the frequency of same and confirmation that the father is compliant with any treatment he made be undergoing with that mental health provider. the father shall provide the said mental health practitioner a copy of these orders, reasons for decision and a copy of the family reports dated 6 october 2022 and 4 march 2022. the report/letter shall acknowledge that the author has been provided with and read these orders, reasons for decision and the said family reports. (c) on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. the mother shall be and is authorised to communicate with the father’s mental health provider and request reports(not more than once every 6 month period) as to the father’s compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (d) the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) and order 6(d) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. the mother shall be and is authorised to communicate with the father’s mental health provider and request reports(not more than once every 6 month period) as to the father’s compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (d) the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) and order 6(d) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.
judge myers: i would like to hear more about [c family centre]. [ms p], you’ve seen in the father’s orders that he seeks that the children engage with a particular service in [city b] called [c family centre] for family therapy, and you’re aware that children are currently undertaking some counselling with a counsellor. the evidence appears to be that they’ve only had a couple of sessions with the counsellor and, thus far, the counselling has been unsuccessful. do you think it might be beneficial for there to be a new counsellor engaged specifically to provide family therapy, rather than trying to utilise the existing counsellors that seem only had a couple of sessions? ms p: ---it certainly could be beneficial. it would depend – therapy can – a big portion of therapy can depend on the rapport with the therapist as well, but engaging someone that is dealing with the whole family from the beginning could be beneficial, because it’s a new – new insight, and i’m assuming that they would have instruction, or the orders provided to them so that they would have an understanding of what the purpose is. judge myers: so is what you’re saying looking at something with fresh eyes – being a new counsellor or being a new family therapist rather than engaging with the old? looking at it holistically with everybody afresh could be a better outcome, or potentially a better outcome. ms p: ---yes. it could be. yes.   p]: i think that’s why the proposal for a – sorry, a new intervention, a new therapist is there because it’s a – as i was saying, it’s a fresh view of the matter. you start from the beginning with everybody involved, because, as i said, i can only speak on how i would run the intervention to give you an idea, you know. it is something that i would meet with all parties separately initially, so [mr otero], [ms kasun], and then the children, to get an understanding of where everybody was at and then i would formulate my treatment plan. i think changing to a new therapist, gives that – that this is someone that’s agreed rather than something that [ms kasun] has chosen for the children, would be my understanding of why it may work better for [mr otero] to suggest that rather than the current therapist. mr cohen: and how many sessions would that – in terms of practicality, how many sessions would happen and how often would they be and who would they be with? [ms p]: ---well, as i said, initially i would meet with everybody, and then if i was doing an intervention with the children i would imagine that you would be expecting some level of change in about six to eight sessions, not necessarily a complete removal of all that they’re experiencing, but if you were doing an intervention, you would be expecting some change between six and eight sessions. mr cohen: but, in terms of the father, the father could do those sessions by zoom or teams or something, by avl? [ms p]: ---certainly. yes, the – i mean, the benefit of the pandemic and the research behind the interventions that psychologists have done over zoom versus face-to-face is that, you know, they’re still effective sessions with adults, so they certainly could happen for [mr otero] over a – over a video conference.
mr o’brien: so, you’re aware of the event that the mother asserts occurred at the day care centre, correct? [ms p]: ---yes. mr o’brien: if the children had witnessed that, that would be something which would be classified, presumably, as a traumatic event for them to witness, wouldn’t it?— [ms p]: -yes. mr o’brien: even if the children hadn’t witnessed the mother being punched, but had witnessed the father laying lands on the mother during an argument about the children, that would have also been traumatic for them to witness, correct?--- [ms p]: that’s correct. mr o’brien: and if the youngest child recalls, rightly or wrongly, but recalls being hit by an open door when his father was reversing the car and knocked over, that would be something quite significant to a young child of that age, wouldn’t it? [ms p]: ---yes. mr o’brien: and that would engender negative feelings towards the parent who they perceived was the cause of that, wouldn’t it? [ms p]: ---that’s likely, yes. mr o’brien: and it would cause perhaps a fear response in respect of that parent, wouldn’t it? [ms p]: ---it could, yes. mr o’brien: and it could certainly be something that really does shape their views in these proceedings of the father in a negative way, couldn’t it? [ms p]: ---yes, yes. mr o’brien: and the children, since that event, with the exception of your office, haven’t spent any time with him, have they? [ms p]: ---no physical time, yes. no. mr o’brien: so, it’s likely that introducing the children to the father is problematic due to this event that they have experienced, isn’t it? [ms p]: ---yes.
....the children each presented as strongly aligned with [ms kasun] and rejecting of a relationship with [mr otero], with both children stating that they did not want to spend time with him. given the history of care and the length of time since the children have spent time with [mr otero], the children’s primary relationship would be with [ms kasun]. given the children’s age and likely development stage combined with the length of time since they have spent time with [mr otero], it is recommended that limited weight be given to their views.   the circumstances in which the order was made, (2) about any evidence admitted in the proceedings for the order, (3) whether any findings were made by the local court magistrate in the proceedings, (4) or of any other relevant matters in relation to the making of the family violence order.   about any evidence admitted in the proceedings for the order, (3) whether any findings were made by the local court magistrate in the proceedings, (4) or of any other relevant matters in relation to the making of the family violence order.   whether any findings were made by the local court magistrate in the proceedings, (4) or of any other relevant matters in relation to the making of the family violence order.   or of any other relevant matters in relation to the making of the family violence order.   that the issues of relocation and the best interests of the child must be considered as interdependent matters, (2) a persuasive argument in support of or against, the proposed relocation does not need to be set out, (3) the interests of both the relocating parent and the non-relocating parent must be evaluated in the context of the best interests of the child, (4) the court is not obliged to disregard the legitimate interests of the parents. however, where there is a conflict between the legitimate interest of the child’s parents, the paramount consideration of the child’s best interest interests must be given priority, and (5) the parent seeking to vary the present arrangements and ultimately change the child’s place of residence bears the onus of satisfying the court that the relocation is in the child’s best interests.   a persuasive argument in support of or against, the proposed relocation does not need to be set out, (3) the interests of both the relocating parent and the non-relocating parent must be evaluated in the context of the best interests of the child, (4) the court is not obliged to disregard the legitimate interests of the parents. however, where there is a conflict between the legitimate interest of the child’s parents, the paramount consideration of the child’s best interest interests must be given priority, and (5) the parent seeking to vary the present arrangements and ultimately change the child’s place of residence bears the onus of satisfying the court that the relocation is in the child’s best interests.   the interests of both the relocating parent and the non-relocating parent must be evaluated in the context of the best interests of the child, (4) the court is not obliged to disregard the legitimate interests of the parents. however, where there is a conflict between the legitimate interest of the child’s parents, the paramount consideration of the child’s best interest interests must be given priority, and (5) the parent seeking to vary the present arrangements and ultimately change the child’s place of residence bears the onus of satisfying the court that the relocation is in the child’s best interests.   the court is not obliged to disregard the legitimate interests of the parents. however, where there is a conflict between the legitimate interest of the child’s parents, the paramount consideration of the child’s best interest interests must be given priority, and (5) the parent seeking to vary the present arrangements and ultimately change the child’s place of residence bears the onus of satisfying the court that the relocation is in the child’s best interests.   the parent seeking to vary the present arrangements and ultimately change the child’s place of residence bears the onus of satisfying the court that the relocation is in the child’s best interests.
secondly, it is important to remember that in australia, whilst the welfare (or best interests) of the child are, by statute, the “paramount” consideration in the exercise of jurisdiction such as was invoked here, they are not the sole consideration. in this respect, the position in this country is different from that in canada. it more closely conforms to the language of the convention on the rights of the child. statutory instructions as to the paramountcy that is to be accorded to the child’s welfare or best interests are to be understood as they apply to a child living in australian society, normally in relationship with both parents and other members of its family. whilst the legislation considered in this case, and later statutory reforms, give the highest priority to the child’s welfare and best interests, that consideration does not expel every other relevant interest from receiving its due weight. in part, this is because (as the english courts recognised long ago) the enjoyment by parents of their freedoms necessarily impinges on the happiness of the child. but, in part, it is also because legislation such as fla 1975 and fca 1975 is enacted to take effect within a society of a particular character whose members enjoy a high measure of personal freedom, diminished only to the extent that the law obliges.
whatever might be the legal characterisation of the right the mother may possess to move freely, it must be subordinated by her parenting obligations under the family law act. the best interests of the children are paramount. the legislation says as much in express terms.   that within 14 days the father shall attend upon his current mental health provider. (b) the father shall do all things reasonably necessary to obtain a written report/letter from the abovementioned mental health provider as to whether the father requires further treatment including anger management counselling and if so, the frequency of same and confirmation that the father is compliant with any treatment he made be undergoing with that mental health provider. the father shall provide the said mental health practitioner a copy of these orders, reasons for decision and a copy of the family reports dated 6 october 2022 and 4 march 2022. the report/letter shall acknowledge that the author has been provided with and read these orders, reasons for decision and the said family reports. (c) on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. the mother shall be and is authorised to communicate with the father’s mental health provider and request reports (not more than once every 6 month period) as to the father’s compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (d) the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) and order 6(d) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   the father shall do all things reasonably necessary to obtain a written report/letter from the abovementioned mental health provider as to whether the father requires further treatment including anger management counselling and if so, the frequency of same and confirmation that the father is compliant with any treatment he made be undergoing with that mental health provider. the father shall provide the said mental health practitioner a copy of these orders, reasons for decision and a copy of the family reports dated 6 october 2022 and 4 march 2022. the report/letter shall acknowledge that the author has been provided with and read these orders, reasons for decision and the said family reports. (c) on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. the mother shall be and is authorised to communicate with the father’s mental health provider and request reports (not more than once every 6 month period) as to the father’s compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (d) the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) and order 6(d) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.   on receipt of the report/letter referred to in order 6(b) above, the father shall provide to the mother or her legal representative a copy of the report. the mother shall be and is authorised to communicate with the father’s mental health provider and request reports (not more than once every 6 month period) as to the father’s compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (d) the father shall continue to be compliant with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider. (e) in the event the father is not compliant pursuant to order 6(b) and order 6(d) above, the father’s time shall be suspended until such time that he furnishes evidence of compliance with any treatment that is recommended by the nominated mental health provider.
the court finds that the order sought by the father, that provides, that the mother cause the children to reside in the greater metropolitan sydney area within 28 days and in the event that the mother refuses to relocate the children’s residence back to the greater sydney metropolitan area that the children live with the father is not in the best interest of the children.  city b was “primarily chosen” by the mother as it could provide medical care treating x for adhd, (b) the mother and mr h have “great job opportunities” in city b. (c) the mother and mr h have been able to remain as employees in the armed forces at city b that affords them a non-taxable income. (d) the mother and mr h have engaged in civilian employment in city b, namely mr h as a tradesman, and the mother securing a position as an administrative officer in the t company at city b. (e) if the mother and mr h had stayed in nsw they would have suffered financial hardship, would have been “posted out” regularly in the armed forces (in other words moved around from base to base) that would cause the children disruption. (f) the mother and mr h were no longer eligible for armed forces service accommodation and would need to pay rent. (g) that the mother and mr h have no family support to care for the children in nsw. (h) mr h grew up in city b and his “whole family” reside in city b. (i) that the mother and the children have a “very close relationship” with mr h’s family and that the children call mr h’s parents “nanna” and “pop”. (j) that the mother and mr h have well settled accommodation in a 4 bedroom home with the children each having their own bedroom. (k) that the children are well settled, with x being enrolled in grade 1, and y enrolled in prep, at u school. (l) that both children are involved in extra circular activities at city b that they enjoy, with x playing sports, and y enrolled in hobby classes.   the mother and mr h have “great job opportunities” in city b. (c) the mother and mr h have been able to remain as employees in the armed forces at city b that affords them a non-taxable income. (d) the mother and mr h have engaged in civilian employment in city b, namely mr h as a tradesman, and the mother securing a position as an administrative officer in the t company at city b. (e) if the mother and mr h had stayed in nsw they would have suffered financial hardship, would have been “posted out” regularly in the armed forces (in other words moved around from base to base) that would cause the children disruption. (f) the mother and mr h were no longer eligible for armed forces service accommodation and would need to pay rent. (g) that the mother and mr h have no family support to care for the children in nsw. (h) mr h grew up in city b and his “whole family” reside in city b. (i) that the mother and the children have a “very close relationship” with mr h’s family and that the children call mr h’s parents “nanna” and “pop”. (j) that the mother and mr h have well settled accommodation in a 4 bedroom home with the children each having their own bedroom. (k) that the children are well settled, with x being enrolled in grade 1, and y enrolled in prep, at u school. (l) that both children are involved in extra circular activities at city b that they enjoy, with x playing sports, and y enrolled in hobby classes.   the mother and mr h have been able to remain as employees in the armed forces at city b that affords them a non-taxable income. (d) the mother and mr h have engaged in civilian employment in city b, namely mr h as a tradesman, and the mother securing a position as an administrative officer in the t company at city b. (e) if the mother and mr h had stayed in nsw they would have suffered financial hardship, would have been “posted out” regularly in the armed forces (in other words moved around from base to base) that would cause the children disruption. (f) the mother and mr h were no longer eligible for armed forces service accommodation and would need to pay rent. (g) that the mother and mr h have no family support to care for the children in nsw. (h) mr h grew up in city b and his “whole family” reside in city b. (i) that the mother and the children have a “very close relationship” with mr h’s family and that the children call mr h’s parents “nanna” and “pop”. (j) that the mother and mr h have well settled accommodation in a 4 bedroom home with the children each having their own bedroom. (k) that the children are well settled, with x being enrolled in grade 1, and y enrolled in prep, at u school. (l) that both children are involved in extra circular activities at city b that they enjoy, with x playing sports, and y enrolled in hobby classes.   the mother and mr h have engaged in civilian employment in city b, namely mr h as a tradesman, and the mother securing a position as an administrative officer in the t company at city b. (e) if the mother and mr h had stayed in nsw they would have suffered financial hardship, would have been “posted out” regularly in the armed forces (in other words moved around from base to base) that would cause the children disruption. (f) the mother and mr h were no longer eligible for armed forces service accommodation and would need to pay rent. (g) that the mother and mr h have no family support to care for the children in nsw. (h) mr h grew up in city b and his “whole family” reside in city b. (i) that the mother and the children have a “very close relationship” with mr h’s family and that the children call mr h’s parents “nanna” and “pop”. (j) that the mother and mr h have well settled accommodation in a 4 bedroom home with the children each having their own bedroom. (k) that the children are well settled, with x being enrolled in grade 1, and y enrolled in prep, at u school. (l) that both children are involved in extra circular activities at city b that they enjoy, with x playing sports, and y enrolled in hobby classes.   if the mother and mr h had stayed in nsw they would have suffered financial hardship, would have been “posted out” regularly in the armed forces (in other words moved around from base to base) that would cause the children disruption. (f) the mother and mr h were no longer eligible for armed forces service accommodation and would need to pay rent. (g) that the mother and mr h have no family support to care for the children in nsw. (h) mr h grew up in city b and his “whole family” reside in city b. (i) that the mother and the children have a “very close relationship” with mr h’s family and that the children call mr h’s parents “nanna” and “pop”. (j) that the mother and mr h have well settled accommodation in a 4 bedroom home with the children each having their own bedroom. (k) that the children are well settled, with x being enrolled in grade 1, and y enrolled in prep, at u school. (l) that both children are involved in extra circular activities at city b that they enjoy, with x playing sports, and y enrolled in hobby classes.   the mother and mr h were no longer eligible for armed forces service accommodation and would need to pay rent. (g) that the mother and mr h have no family support to care for the children in nsw. (h) mr h grew up in city b and his “whole family” reside in city b. (i) that the mother and the children have a “very close relationship” with mr h’s family and that the children call mr h’s parents “nanna” and “pop”. (j) that the mother and mr h have well settled accommodation in a 4 bedroom home with the children each having their own bedroom. (k) that the children are well settled, with x being enrolled in grade 1, and y enrolled in prep, at u school. (l) that both children are involved in extra circular activities at city b that they enjoy, with x playing sports, and y enrolled in hobby classes.   that the mother and mr h have no family support to care for the children in nsw. (h) mr h grew up in city b and his “whole family” reside in city b. (i) that the mother and the children have a “very close relationship” with mr h’s family and that the children call mr h’s parents “nanna” and “pop”. (j) that the mother and mr h have well settled accommodation in a 4 bedroom home with the children each having their own bedroom. (k) that the children are well settled, with x being enrolled in grade 1, and y enrolled in prep, at u school. (l) that both children are involved in extra circular activities at city b that they enjoy, with x playing sports, and y enrolled in hobby classes.   mr h grew up in city b and his “whole family” reside in city b. (i) that the mother and the children have a “very close relationship” with mr h’s family and that the children call mr h’s parents “nanna” and “pop”. (j) that the mother and mr h have well settled accommodation in a 4 bedroom home with the children each having their own bedroom. (k) that the children are well settled, with x being enrolled in grade 1, and y enrolled in prep, at u school. (l) that both children are involved in extra circular activities at city b that they enjoy, with x playing sports, and y enrolled in hobby classes.   that the mother and the children have a “very close relationship” with mr h’s family and that the children call mr h’s parents “nanna” and “pop”. (j) that the mother and mr h have well settled accommodation in a 4 bedroom home with the children each having their own bedroom. (k) that the children are well settled, with x being enrolled in grade 1, and y enrolled in prep, at u school. (l) that both children are involved in extra circular activities at city b that they enjoy, with x playing sports, and y enrolled in hobby classes.   that the mother and mr h have well settled accommodation in a 4 bedroom home with the children each having their own bedroom. (k) that the children are well settled, with x being enrolled in grade 1, and y enrolled in prep, at u school. (l) that both children are involved in extra circular activities at city b that they enjoy, with x playing sports, and y enrolled in hobby classes.   that the children are well settled, with x being enrolled in grade 1, and y enrolled in prep, at u school. (l) that both children are involved in extra circular activities at city b that they enjoy, with x playing sports, and y enrolled in hobby classes.   that both children are involved in extra circular activities at city b that they enjoy, with x playing sports, and y enrolled in hobby classes.
further in her 6 october 2022 report at paragraphs 59 and 60 the family consultant maintains this view and recommends that the children live with the mother and remain in city b. she states at paragraph 54 that such move is
‘likely to negatively impact the children given their presentation and the reported stability they have in school with their peers’, that the father is seeking to prioritise his own needs over those of the children by seeking their return, and ‘moving the children from living with her is likely to negatively affect the children’s sense of safety and well-being.’ this is undoubtedly correct, and the father’s orders for the children to relocate to sydney ought be dismissed.
he was also critical of the court process, stating that he “met some bloke on zoom, who wrote him off as a parent,” he clarified that [the senior registrar’s] decision in relation to the children was “not child focused” and that there was “very little accountability” to the children’s well-being. he emphasised that nothing has been well thought out and it is “too hard” for mum ([ms kasun]) to move back. [mr otero] said that this was not a child focused decision. he stated that there are hundreds of pages of documents and no one has bothered to speak to the children. [mr otero] said that there is very little accountability to the children’s well-being.   sydney and city b, where the parents live, are too far apart to make equal time or substantial and significant time reasonably practical, (b) the parent’s current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of equal time or substantial and significant time is so poor that such an arrangement is not reasonably practical, and (c) the impact that an arrangement of equal time or substantial and significant time would have on the children (given their level of resistance to spending time with the father) would be detrimental such that an arrangement of equal time or substantial and significant time would not be reasonably practical.   the parent’s current and future capacity to communicate with each other and resolve difficulties that might arise in implementing an arrangement of equal time or substantial and significant time is so poor that such an arrangement is not reasonably practical, and (c) the impact that an arrangement of equal time or substantial and significant time would have on the children (given their level of resistance to spending time with the father) would be detrimental such that an arrangement of equal time or substantial and significant time would not be reasonably practical.   the impact that an arrangement of equal time or substantial and significant time would have on the children (given their level of resistance to spending time with the father) would be detrimental such that an arrangement of equal time or substantial and significant time would not be reasonably practical.
associate: dated: 8 may 2023
dated: 8 may 2023