last updated: 21 june 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
ismat & attia [2023] fedcfamc2f 530
orders
the court orders:  notify the father of any proposed decision relating to the long-term care and welfare of the children and the reasons for the proposal, such notification to be given in writing at least six weeks prior to a final decision being made, (b) take into consideration any views expressed by the father, in writing, about the proposed decision, and (c) notify the father in writing of her final decision about the issue.   take into consideration any views expressed by the father, in writing, about the proposed decision, and (c) notify the father in writing of her final decision about the issue.   notify the father in writing of her final decision about the issue.   stage 1: for 3 hours each alternate sunday unsupervised for 8 months, from 10:00 am to 1:00 pm. (b) stage 2: commencing january 2024, each alternate sunday from 10:00 am to 4:00 pm for 12 months. (c) stage 3: commencing january 2025: (i) each alternate weekend from saturday 10:00 am until sunday 4:00 pm, (d) stage 4: commencing at the beginning of term 1 in 2026: (i) during school terms, each alternate weekend from saturday 10:00 am until sunday 4:00 pm, and (ii) during the april, july and september school holidays for at least 1 week, and during the december school holidays, for at least 2 weeks, with such time to agreed between the parties in writing at least 7 days prior to the commencement of the school holidays, and failing agreement, the first half with the father in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. for the purpose of these orders, the school holidays are deemed to commence at 9:00 am on the first day after the public-school term ceases and changeovers shall occur at 6:00 pm at the commencement of each parties’ time with the children. (e) otherwise as agreed between the parties in writing. (f) on special occasions, as follows: (i) on the children’s birthdays, on the sunday immediately following the children’s birthday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm. (ii) on easter, commencing 2024, and each even numbered year thereafter, from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on easter day, and commencing 2025, and each odd numbered year thereafter, from 2:00 pm to 6:00 pm on easter day. (iii) on boxing day in 2023 and 2025 and from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm and on christmas day in 2024 from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm.   stage 2: commencing january 2024, each alternate sunday from 10:00 am to 4:00 pm for 12 months. (c) stage 3: commencing january 2025: (i) each alternate weekend from saturday 10:00 am until sunday 4:00 pm, (d) stage 4: commencing at the beginning of term 1 in 2026: (i) during school terms, each alternate weekend from saturday 10:00 am until sunday 4:00 pm, and (ii) during the april, july and september school holidays for at least 1 week, and during the december school holidays, for at least 2 weeks, with such time to agreed between the parties in writing at least 7 days prior to the commencement of the school holidays, and failing agreement, the first half with the father in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. for the purpose of these orders, the school holidays are deemed to commence at 9:00 am on the first day after the public-school term ceases and changeovers shall occur at 6:00 pm at the commencement of each parties’ time with the children. (e) otherwise as agreed between the parties in writing. (f) on special occasions, as follows: (i) on the children’s birthdays, on the sunday immediately following the children’s birthday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm. (ii) on easter, commencing 2024, and each even numbered year thereafter, from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on easter day, and commencing 2025, and each odd numbered year thereafter, from 2:00 pm to 6:00 pm on easter day. (iii) on boxing day in 2023 and 2025 and from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm and on christmas day in 2024 from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm.   stage 3: commencing january 2025: (i) each alternate weekend from saturday 10:00 am until sunday 4:00 pm, (d) stage 4: commencing at the beginning of term 1 in 2026: (i) during school terms, each alternate weekend from saturday 10:00 am until sunday 4:00 pm, and (ii) during the april, july and september school holidays for at least 1 week, and during the december school holidays, for at least 2 weeks, with such time to agreed between the parties in writing at least 7 days prior to the commencement of the school holidays, and failing agreement, the first half with the father in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. for the purpose of these orders, the school holidays are deemed to commence at 9:00 am on the first day after the public-school term ceases and changeovers shall occur at 6:00 pm at the commencement of each parties’ time with the children. (e) otherwise as agreed between the parties in writing. (f) on special occasions, as follows: (i) on the children’s birthdays, on the sunday immediately following the children’s birthday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm. (ii) on easter, commencing 2024, and each even numbered year thereafter, from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on easter day, and commencing 2025, and each odd numbered year thereafter, from 2:00 pm to 6:00 pm on easter day. (iii) on boxing day in 2023 and 2025 and from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm and on christmas day in 2024 from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm.   each alternate weekend from saturday 10:00 am until sunday 4:00 pm,   stage 4: commencing at the beginning of term 1 in 2026: (i) during school terms, each alternate weekend from saturday 10:00 am until sunday 4:00 pm, and (ii) during the april, july and september school holidays for at least 1 week, and during the december school holidays, for at least 2 weeks, with such time to agreed between the parties in writing at least 7 days prior to the commencement of the school holidays, and failing agreement, the first half with the father in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. for the purpose of these orders, the school holidays are deemed to commence at 9:00 am on the first day after the public-school term ceases and changeovers shall occur at 6:00 pm at the commencement of each parties’ time with the children. (e) otherwise as agreed between the parties in writing. (f) on special occasions, as follows: (i) on the children’s birthdays, on the sunday immediately following the children’s birthday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm. (ii) on easter, commencing 2024, and each even numbered year thereafter, from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on easter day, and commencing 2025, and each odd numbered year thereafter, from 2:00 pm to 6:00 pm on easter day. (iii) on boxing day in 2023 and 2025 and from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm and on christmas day in 2024 from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm.   during school terms, each alternate weekend from saturday 10:00 am until sunday 4:00 pm, and (ii) during the april, july and september school holidays for at least 1 week, and during the december school holidays, for at least 2 weeks, with such time to agreed between the parties in writing at least 7 days prior to the commencement of the school holidays, and failing agreement, the first half with the father in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. for the purpose of these orders, the school holidays are deemed to commence at 9:00 am on the first day after the public-school term ceases and changeovers shall occur at 6:00 pm at the commencement of each parties’ time with the children.  ) during the april, july and september school holidays for at least 1 week, and during the december school holidays, for at least 2 weeks, with such time to agreed between the parties in writing at least 7 days prior to the commencement of the school holidays, and failing agreement, the first half with the father in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. for the purpose of these orders, the school holidays are deemed to commence at 9:00 am on the first day after the public-school term ceases and changeovers shall occur at 6:00 pm at the commencement of each parties’ time with the children.   otherwise as agreed between the parties in writing. (f) on special occasions, as follows: (i) on the children’s birthdays, on the sunday immediately following the children’s birthday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm. (ii) on easter, commencing 2024, and each even numbered year thereafter, from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on easter day, and commencing 2025, and each odd numbered year thereafter, from 2:00 pm to 6:00 pm on easter day. (iii) on boxing day in 2023 and 2025 and from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm and on christmas day in 2024 from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm.   on special occasions, as follows: (i) on the children’s birthdays, on the sunday immediately following the children’s birthday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm. (ii) on easter, commencing 2024, and each even numbered year thereafter, from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on easter day, and commencing 2025, and each odd numbered year thereafter, from 2:00 pm to 6:00 pm on easter day. (iii) on boxing day in 2023 and 2025 and from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm and on christmas day in 2024 from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm.   on the children’s birthdays, on the sunday immediately following the children’s birthday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm. (ii) on easter, commencing 2024, and each even numbered year thereafter, from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on easter day, and commencing 2025, and each odd numbered year thereafter, from 2:00 pm to 6:00 pm on easter day. (iii) on boxing day in 2023 and 2025 and from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm and on christmas day in 2024 from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm.  ) on easter, commencing 2024, and each even numbered year thereafter, from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on easter day, and commencing 2025, and each odd numbered year thereafter, from 2:00 pm to 6:00 pm on easter day. (iii) on boxing day in 2023 and 2025 and from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm and on christmas day in 2024 from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm.  i) on boxing day in 2023 and 2025 and from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm and on christmas day in 2024 from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm.   for the purpose of this order, the parent with whom the children are spending time with is to ensure that the children are available to take the call and the mobile shall be charged, switched on and in an area with reception.   notify the other parent, (b) provide the other parent with the full details of the practitioner or medical facility upon which the children attend as soon as practicable, and (c) advise the medical practitioner or medical facility that the other parent has authority to access the children’s medical records and other information upon their request.   provide the other parent with the full details of the practitioner or medical facility upon which the children attend as soon as practicable, and (c) advise the medical practitioner or medical facility that the other parent has authority to access the children’s medical records and other information upon their request.   advise the medical practitioner or medical facility that the other parent has authority to access the children’s medical records and other information upon their request.   a copy of all school reports and school photo order forms for the children. (b) notification for school activities that parents are invited to attend. (c) notification of parent/teacher nights.   notification for school activities that parents are invited to attend. (c) notification of parent/teacher nights.   notification of parent/teacher nights.   sporting activities, events and functions, (b) extra-curricular activities, events and functions that allow for parental attendance, (c) school events, activities and functions.   extra-curricular activities, events and functions that allow for parental attendance, (c) school events, activities and functions.   school events, activities and functions.
however, the father shall not approach the mother at any such event.   discussing these proceedings, or showing any document related to these proceedings, to the children, (b) denigrating the other party, or members of the other party’s family to the children or in the hearing or presence of the children, and (c) administering any physical or corporal punishment upon either of the children or allowing any third person to do so.   denigrating the other party, or members of the other party’s family to the children or in the hearing or presence of the children, and (c) administering any physical or corporal punishment upon either of the children or allowing any third person to do so.   administering any physical or corporal punishment upon either of the children or allowing any third person to do so.   changeover shall occur at the front entrance of shopping centre g adjacent to the store h at the commencement and conclusion of time, (b) the father shall not be present at changeover unless the mother has previously indicated that she will not be attending changeover herself, (c) the mother and the father notify each other in writing of the person who will be attending at changeover on their respective behalf (unless the person has previously attended changeover on behalf of a parent), and (d) the mother and father shall ensure that any person attending changeover on their behalf is known to the children.   the father shall not be present at changeover unless the mother has previously indicated that she will not be attending changeover herself, (c) the mother and the father notify each other in writing of the person who will be attending at changeover on their respective behalf (unless the person has previously attended changeover on behalf of a parent), and (d) the mother and father shall ensure that any person attending changeover on their behalf is known to the children.   the mother and the father notify each other in writing of the person who will be attending at changeover on their respective behalf (unless the person has previously attended changeover on behalf of a parent), and (d) the mother and father shall ensure that any person attending changeover on their behalf is known to the children.   the mother and father shall ensure that any person attending changeover on their behalf is known to the children.
reasons for judgment
judge newbrun:
introduction
proposals
3. that the mother: notify the father of any proposed decision relating to the long-term care and welfare of the children and the reasons for the proposal, such notification to be given in writing at least six weeks prior to a final decision being made, take into consideration any views expressed by the father, in writing, about the proposed decision, and
c. notify the father in writing of her final decision about the issue.
4. that the children spend time with and communicate with the father as follows: stage 1: for 3 hours each alternate sunday unsupervised for 8 months, from 10:00 am to 1:00 pm. stage 2: commencing january 2024, each alternate sunday from 10:00 am to 4:00 pm for 12 months. stage 3: commencing january 2025: each alternate weekend from saturday 10:00 am until sunday 4:00 pm,
d. stage 4: commencing at the beginning of term 1 in 2026: during school terms, each alternate weekend from saturday 10:00am until sunday 4:00 pm, and during the april, july and september school holidays for at least 1 week, and during the december school holidays, for at least 2 weeks, with such time to agreed between the parties in writing at least 7 days prior to the commencement of the school holidays, and failing agreement, the first half with the father in odd numbered years and the second half in even numbered years. for the purpose of these orders, the school holidays are deemed to commence at 9:00 am on the first day after the public-school term ceases and changeovers shall occur at 6:00 pm at the commencement of each parties’ time with the children. e. otherwise as agreed between the parties in writing. f. on special occasions, as follows: on the children’s birthdays, on the sunday immediately following the children’s birthday from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm. on easter, commencing 2024, and each even numbered year thereafter, from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm on easter day, and commencing 2025, and each odd numbered year thereafter, from 2:00 pm to 6:00 pm on easter day. on boxing day in 2023 and 2025 and from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm and on christmas day in 2024 from 10:00 am to 2:00 pm. each parent is to communicate with the children by telephone or video call, during periods where the children are not otherwise in that parent’s care as agreed between the parties, or failing agreement, each thursday and saturday between 6.00 pm and 6.30 pm. for the purpose of this order, the parent with whom the children are spending time with is to ensure that the children are available to take the call and the mobile shall be charged, switched on and in an area with reception. that in the event of the children suffering a medical emergency or illness requiring medical attention, the parent with whom the children is spending time, must as soon as practicable: notify the other parent, provide the other parent with the full details of the practitioner or medical facility upon which the children attend as soon as practicable, and advise the medical practitioner or medical facility that the other parent has authority to access the children’s medical records and other information upon their request. that each party shall authorise the children’s treating medical practitioner/s to supply information concerning the children to each parent. that these orders provide authority for each parent to make arrangements at the children’s day care centre, school and after school care to obtain the following information and documents at their own cost: a copy of all school reports and school photo order forms for the children. notification for school activities that parents are invited to attend. notification of parent/teacher nights. each parent will be entitled to attend all events involving the children which are routinely attended by parents, including: a. sporting activities, events and functions, extra-curricular activities, events and functions that allow for parental attendance, c. school events, activities and functions. however, the father shall not approach the mother at any such event.
10. that each parent be restrained by injunction from: discussing these proceedings, or showing any document related to these proceedings, to the children, and denigrating the other party, or members of the other party’s family to the children or in the hearing or presence of the children. that for the purposes of facilitating the children’s spending time with the father, unless the mother and the father otherwise agree in writing: changeover shall occur at the front entrance of [shopping centre g] adjacent to the [store h] at the commencement and conclusion of time, the father shall not be present at changeover unless the mother has previously indicated that she will not be attending changeover herself, the mother and the father notify each other in writing of the person who will be attending at changeover on their respective behalf (unless the person has previously attended changeover on behalf of a parent), and the mother and father shall ensure that any person attending changeover on their behalf is known to the children. that the children’s time with the father shall not progress to stage 3 (ie. overnight time) unless the father has completed the 1-2-3 magic parenting course and provided a certificate of completion of such course to the mother. that the mother take all steps to engage in and complete a keeping in contact program as soon as practicable and, in any case, within 12 months of the date of these orders.
material relied upon  his case outline filed 11 april 2023, (b) his affidavit filed 6 april 2023, (c) affidavit of ms w filed 6 april 2023, (d) affidavit of dr o filed 14 april 2023.   his affidavit filed 6 april 2023, (c) affidavit of ms w filed 6 april 2023, (d) affidavit of dr o filed 14 april 2023.   affidavit of ms w filed 6 april 2023, (d) affidavit of dr o filed 14 april 2023.   affidavit of dr o filed 14 april 2023.   her case outline filed 11 april 2023, (b) response to application for final orders filed 2 october 2019, (c) her affidavit filed 6 april 2023,   response to application for final orders filed 2 october 2019, (c) her affidavit filed 6 april 2023,   her affidavit filed 6 april 2023,   case outline filed 14 april 2023, (b) family reports of ms p dated 5 november 2020 and 19 september 2022.   family reports of ms p dated 5 november 2020 and 19 september 2022.
exhibits  exhibit a: nsw police facts sheet (pages 18–21 of mother’s tender bundle), (b) exhibit b: family reports of ms p dated 5 november 2020 and 19 september 2022.   exhibit b: family reports of ms p dated 5 november 2020 and 19 september 2022.
evidence
trial affidavit of father
the interview for depression revealed that [mr ismat] has likely been suffering from depression at various stages in his life since his teenage years. his current mood has also been adversely affected by his current predicament. at present, he is suffering from symptoms such as low self­ esteem, hopelessness, sadness, loss of pleasure, irritability, poor decision-making, sleep problems, and loneliness. [mr ismat] grew up as a christian in [country j] and described the difficulties his family endured during the [country j] war, and subsequent united nations (un) sanctions, the 2003 invasion of [country j], and with the persecution of christians in post-war [country j]. [mr ismat] described symptoms that meant he likely suffered from his first bout of depression during his middle teens, not long after the cessation of the war. he seemed to recover after about two years and then suffered another bout of depression when [country j] was invaded, which coincided with the death of his father in 2003. once again, he seemed to recover from the depression, but became depressed again in the context of the economic hardship, religious persecution, and he constant threat of violence in post-war [country j]. [mr ismat] immigrated to the [country q] in 2012 and his mood improved. he was married in 2015 and moved to australia the same year. his mood began to deteriorate in late 2017 due to ongoing financial problems and difficulties within his marriage. at the time of the incident that led to current charges, [mr ismat] met the dsm v criteria for a major depressive episode, in the severe category. (italics added)
the interview for depression revealed that [mr ismat] has likely suffered from generalised anxiety disorder since his teenage years. he is suffering from symptoms such as having difficulties relaxing, fear of the worst happening, nervousness, and fear. he developed anxiety in the context of growing up in an unstable, war-torn environment, where his and his family's safety was never certain. due to this he learned that he needed to be constantly on guard to assess for possible threats. at the time of the incident that led to current charges, [mr ismat] met the dsm v criteria for generalised anxiety disorder. (italics added)
at the time of assessment, [mr ismat] was suffering from major depressive disorder and generalised anxiety disorder. while he also met the dsm v criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder. he is suffering from the following symptoms: intrusive thoughts and memories, making efforts to avoid the distressing thoughts and memories, negative beliefs about himself, and hypervigilance. [mr ismat] has likely met the full criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder since the invasion of [country j] in 2003. during the invasion, he was living in a very unsafe environment, with troops engaged in battled on the ground, aerial bombardment from coalition forces and regular bombings by insurgents. after the main fighting ended, the insurgents continued to battle coalition forces and he found [country j] to be rather lawless, with he and his family regularly threatened because they were christian. (italics added)
at the time of the incident, [mr ismat] met dsm v criteria for the following: f32.20 - major depressive disorder, single episode, severe, f41.10 - generalised anxiety disorder, f43.10 - post-traumatic stress disorder.
the [work] took place in the evenings and on weekends and his wife, [ms attia], began accusing him of cheating on her, which resulted in regular arguments. the arguments began to become stressful for him and, combined with the financial pressures, had a negative impact on his mood. for the first few months of 2018, [mr ismat]'s mood deteriorated further, and he began to become anxious and worried. he then developed the irrational belief that his wife was asking him about his fidelity because she was guilty about something she had done, so began to feel she must be cheating on him. this led to further arguments. by march 2017, the arguments had become quite regular and [mr ismat]'s anxiety and mood problems had worsened considerably. during an argument with [ms attia] , on april 2nd 2018, he committed the offences for which he now faces court. (italics added)
on the evening of the incident, on april 2nd, 2018, there was another heated argument between [mr ismat] and his wife, with each accusing the other of infidelity. he described that, for a short time, he became angry and irrational, believing that - just as he had done in [country j] to battle the bullies who threatened him - the only way to dissuade his wife from further accusations was to scare her. upon deciding in this irrational course of action, [mr ismat] slapped his wife with an open hand and then picked up a knife to scare her. he stated, "i love my wife and family and would never deliberately hurt her. i just wanted her to stop". he added, "i feel so much sorrow and remorse for what i did. i need help to make sure this never happens again." it would seem that due to depression, anxiety, and ptsd, [mr ismat] reverted back to a tactic that he had successfully used in [country j] to dissuade bullies from threatening him and his family. (italics added)
at the time of committing the offences, [mr ismat] met the dsm v criteria for: f32.20 - major depressive disorder, single episode, severe, f41.10 - generalised anxiety disorder, f43.10 - post-traumatic stress disorder. [mr ismat]'s offences were related to a combination of his dsm v listed mental health issues that had developed while he was living in [country j]. he had somewhat recovered over the past few years, but had relapsed in the context of overwork, relationship problems, and financial difficulties. the mental health led to him engaging in behaviour that is out of context to the environment which it took place. i therefore believe that the most appropriate way of dealing with this man would be the recommended treatment plan set out in annex a. (italics added)   ismat] entered into treatment of his own accord. he seems to be showing good insight into how his past trauma is affected the way he attempted to defuse the argument with his wife. he now realises that he should have simply walked away when he became angry. since the incident, [mr ismat] has also begun seeing his gp for support. the fact that he seemed to recover quite well from his ptsd until recent stressors bodes well for treatment, as it means that the triggers for his conditions are likely situational rather than predisposed. therefore, if he continues treatment with the same positive attitude, there is every reason to predict that his mood will continue to improve, his level of anxiety will reduce, and that he will learn manage his stress and hypervigilance better. when [mr ismat]'s mental health has improved, he will be more resilient in the face of future stressors and therefore much less likely to react in the way that he did.   ismat] is a 40-year-old woman (sic man) with a solid work history and a long history of being a loving, caring husband and father. he developed mental health problems during his 35 years living in strife-torn [country j]. he had nearly overcome these issues, but unfortunately, over the few months leading up to the altercation with his wife, his mental health had relapsed. on the evening of the incident he was having a heated argument with his wife and retreated to behaviours that helped him survive in [country j], essentially using intimidation to in the face of the perceived threat his wife posed. the way he reacted seems to be out-of-character for the environment he was in. [mr ismat] is now receiving the care he needs to address his issues and i strongly believe [mr ismat] represents no threat to the community for the following reasons: he shows no signs of antisocial personality disorder. he has no forensic history. he has a solid work history. his history of being a loving, caring husband and father. at the time of his current crime, he was significantly impaired by his mental health. he is now in treatment and if he stays in treatment for the recommended time, it is very unlikely, given the insight he currently shows, he will ever repeat his mistakes. he seems to be genuinely remorseful for his actions toward his wife. he is motivated to continue with counselling and begin making positive changes. if [mr ismat] continues on his current path, he is on track to achieve his goals of improving his mental health, repairing his marriage, and setting a good example for his children.
treatment progress [mr ismat] has remained in treatment since mid-2018. initially, the aim of the therapy was to improve mood, manage anxiety, and reduce hypervigilance and stress, which was successful. treatment then progressed towards using more advanced cognitive tools aimed at helping [mr ismat] to question long-held negative belief structures and reduce related thoughts and behaviours, such as the beliefs like “the world is a dangerous place” or “i need to combat anger with anger to be effective”, etc. once again, therapy was successful. [mr ismat] learned strategies to better manage his mental health issues and by late 2019 he no longer met dsm v criteria for any mental health condition. he was also engaged in regular positive activities, had better sleep habits, was more social, re-established friendships and was more engaged with his social support networks. additionally, [mr ismat] also found he was much better at managing day to day stress and was no longer becoming angry. additional treatment in addition to his ongoing individual treatment, [mr ismat] completed several group programs including keeping kids in mind, keeping children safe, triple p positive parenting, and defuse men managing emotions. in completing these programs, [mr ismat] has covered topics including preventing childhood neglect, building self-esteem in children, the impact of domestic violence on children's development, managing anger, and supporting his partner. prognosis [mr ismat]'s mental health has improved and is no longer an issue. he has now developed strategies that will ensure he is able to manage his emotions much better in the future should he encounter stressful periods in his life. additionally, he has completed several programs that should ensure he possesses the skills to provide a positive environment for his children's development. (italics added)
trial affidavit of the mother
oral evidence of the father
oral evidence of the mother
dr o  ismat] has attended all scheduled sessions and displayed a high level of motivation to engage. in the sessions that [mr ismat] attended, he spoke about and consolidated the learnings from the parenting, anger management and post separation courses he attended. we have also discussed strategies for how he can maintain his mental health. he has completed the following courses keeping children safe (13 weeks) commenced in september 2018 conducted by [z family centre] defuse men managing emotions completed in december 2019 – [s family centre] triple p certificate completed date 22nd november 2018 – [ab centre] keeping kinds in mind - dated march 2020 [ac centre]. [mr ismat] said that he has worked on his anger management in the defuse men managing emotions course. he felt he had been able to discuss issues in respect of his anger with other participants and also to be open to mutually supportive and challenging environment in the group. [mr ismat] acknowledged that he had been violent in his previous relationship and has developed an awareness of the triggers which caused stress in his family life. he identified a number of stressors including financial issues, jealously and lack of personal accountability. he referred to the insight he had had into taking responsibility for his anger and anger management strategies. we discussed in our sessions the importance of self-care and its connection with emotional and psychological wellbeing. we also canvassed the impact of violence, forms of power and control, equality in intimate relationships and taking responsibility for the part played in the violence cycle. he also discussed appropriate strategies for managing anger and his implementation of those strategies in his current relationships. these included responding rather than reacting, taking more time, being more mindful, respectfulness, listening and observing. [mr ismat] stated that he manages his anger differently and much more maturely in his current relationship.   ismat] presented as not having any current mental health pathology. he was administered the dass and he scored in the normal range for depression, anxiety and stress. he reported that he is currently not medicated except for blood pressure and cholesterol medication. his demeanour was optimistic and his narrative positive. it is important for [mr ismat] to monitor the environmental stressors in his life as there is likely to be a correlation between increased stress and any relapse in his symptoms.
the extent to which [mr ismat] will be able to maintain his current state of mental health will be contingent on a number of factors. they include his self care and attending to lifestyle issues such as sleep, diet, exercise and good work habits. it is important that he continues to remain under the monitoring of his g.p. [mr ismat] also has a number of support networks. they include caring relationships with his partner, his mother and brother with whom he lives and his sister who has been supervising the visits. [mr ismat] also stated that he has also been emotionally buoyed by the progress he has made through the court to advance his time with his children. he spoke optimistically about his relationships with his children and the quality of their interactions with each other. [mr ismat] has indicated that he plans to secure work in the near future. [mr ismat] may wish to consider ongoing monitoring on a monthly basis with a psychologist.
there is a correlation between the state of a parent's mental health and their parenting capacity. it is therefore essential that [mr ismat] continues to monitor the status of his mental health and takes necessary interventions if there is a relapse in his emotional wellbeing.
oral evidence of dr o
would it – the things i’ve related to you earlier, would that have changed the way you had approached your interviews – initial interviews with [mr ismat]?---well, i may – i may have asked him, perhaps, in – in – with – for more detail of – of what was happening for him at the time. i am aware that – that, you know, at the time, he had diagnosis that were quite co-morbid and complex which would have made him extremely emotionally and psychologically vulnerable.
all right. now, you concluded, on the basis of the information you had available to you, which included the dass questionnaire, your observations of [mr ismat] and what he self-reported to you, that at the time that you prepared the report, at the time that you had been seeing him, he didn’t have any outward presentations of a mental health issue. have i understood that correctly?---that’s right. ... are the questions that relate to risks that flow from domestic violence in a relationship and risks that flow from mental health – are they connected, are they separate, or can they be either? ---well, i think they can be both, and, you know, often emotional dysregulation which leads to family violence can be – have very much at its – at its source, stress – excuse me, mental health concerns, post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, anxiety. often emotional dysregulation is a – is a symptom of that, and if there’s an improvement in mental health, that can also often a correlation with an improvement in emotional regulation, and therefore, the likelihood of aggression, violence. so if i understand your answer, the absence of mental health issues is an indicator of less risk of emotional dysregulation or anger management issues, of violence – is that correct to say?---oh, i think there is a very strong correlation. yes, yes. all right. but is it also the case that there can be issues of emotional dysregulation, anger management issues, risks of violence, even if there aren’t mental health problems, in the sense of a formally-diagnosable mental health conditions?---yes, yes. ... so for example, a person’s insight into their reactions and their behaviours, and the impact that has on others – it’s not necessarily something that relates to a mental health diagnosis. it can be a question of just lack of insight?---well, yes. sometimes, also to do with cultural factors, and, well, absolutely, and that’s where courses such as anger management courses can be helpful to people who maybe lack insight and – into the impact of their behaviour. ... and at the beginning of the questions that were asked by the mother’s counsel of you this afternoon, you were taken to, towards the bottom of that second page of your report, the bit that said:   ismat] also stated that he had been emotionally buoyed by the progress he had made, through the court, to having time with his children.
and you were asked about how significant that was and you said that was one factor about his mental health at the time that you had been seeing him and prepared the report. what were the other factors?---well, the other factors were that he had good lifestyle choices, that he had support of – of his family and, certainly for a time, a partner. you know, he talked about sleep, diet. he also talked about, perhaps, the possibility of finding employment. so i – and that he – he had attended courses as – as requested. so they – they were the – what i saw as protective factors on his part. ... when [mr ismat] told you that he had struggled with symptoms of mental health issues, did he particularise what symptoms he had struggled with?---well, he talked about – he talked about depression. he talked about feeling sad, angry. he talked about the feel of behavioural psycho-physical symptoms that – that would have been – i would have considered were anxiety reactions. he didn’t talk a lot about what i would have thought might have been post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms, but the three are often very closely interacted – interacting. he talked a lot about depression, really, in his – in his reports to me. did he particularise what symptoms he experienced relating to depression?---sadness, anger, flatness of mood were what were – i recall him talking about.
the family report
look, it – i’ve certainly recommended no time at all, in cases where fathers have been clearly involved in criminal activities, things like that, where i really think it would be better for the children not to see the parents. i don’t think – i don’t think that is the case here.
and would there be a particular course, or some courses, in relation to parenting skills that you would recommend that he would do?---well, the – the pressure points in parenting usually come in managing misbehaviour, and the ones i would usually recommend for this age would either by the triple p or the 1-2-3 magic, because they both help parents to understand and deal with more difficult behaviour. i think what has been shown, and certainly what i observed, is that [mr ismat] can play with the children. there – there doesn’t seem to be a – a problem there. but where he’s untested, of course, is – is all the – around about bed time when children are tired, things like that. that’s when children are challenging. and the two courses that you’ve mentioned, the triple p parenting and the 1-2-3 magic courses, are they very similar? do they cover the same ground or ?---there – there’s slightly different emphasis, yes. they’re slightly different?---the – the triple p is very much behavioural. the 1-2-3 magic does try to bring in the idea of emotion coaching, which is – is a useful technique and try to get in before the difficult behaviour starts. so they’re both good in their way. [mr ismat] had, again, almost five years ago completed the triple p parenting course? right. right. right. so perhaps the start now would be the 1-2-3 magic course?---2 magic, yes, is a – is a good one.
but is your progression ultimately – or recommendation about progression ultimately still only at four hours each alternate weekend, which is what seems to be suggested ? right. yes. --- at paragraph 39?---yes. it’s very difficult always with – with hours. i certainly felt that remaining at the four hours unsupervised was probably what [ms attia] could tolerate. but as the children grow – grow older they would possibly start asking for more time, and that might be something that [ms attia] could consider. i’m not necessarily saying that it should stick at four hours forever, if that’s the question.
and you may or may not be able to comment on this. but are there increased risks by virtue of longer periods of time, children spending – or, these particular children spending longer periods of time with their father than shorter periods of time? because one view might be, if the father is a risk to them spending overnight time, then he’s a risk spending four hours as well?---well, the sorts of things i mentioned previously, that children often become tired at night, fractious, more difficult to handle, and if someone doesn’t have good control of – good emotional self-regulation, then these are the times when often things go awry. so they – that – yes, so i – i firmly believe that there is a much greater risk to – when overnight time occurs. or lengthy periods, because someone might be able to manage themselves well for a few hours. they can’t necessarily manage themselves well for 48 hours.
okay?---i think, at the time of the update, i was under the distinct impression that this had been down to [mr ismat], that the – that the time had not progressed. and as i say, after reading the affidavit, perhaps that is not the case. i don’t know. but it would – if he had managed to adhere to all of the orders and time had gone through regularly, then i would probably recommend that ultimately some overnight time be considered, if all – all went well. yes. his honour: and can i just ask on this topic, the change of your view from possible overnight time in your first report to four hours, unsupervised, in your second report. the mother’s anxiety was that not a factor or ? it – yes. it was – is that also one of the factors that you took into ?---you’re – you’re right. that was a factor. and the fact that the mother was still very anxious, so that that anxiety didn’t seem to have lessened in the ensuring period was also a factor. mr butters: so in respect of the mother’s anxiety, if her evidence is she hasn’t at least, in the more recent ..... last two years, sought any therapy assistance for that anxiety, is there anything you could recommend going forward, or a service the mother could engage with, to assist with that anxiety in managing the children spending more relation time with the father? ---sure. i usually recommend the keeping contact service through [z family centre] in cases where people may struggle to follow orders.
and in terms of his potential violence or violent nature the father presents with, would it lower your assessment of risk if there’s no evidence of the father being violent to anyone, it appears, from the date of separation until today’s date?---yes, it may. it largely would – there tends to be a pattern of violence only in intimate personal relationships, so if there have been subsequent intimate personal relationship which were free of violence, that – but i – i don’t know whether we can know that. and if there was or appears to be some limited evidence of one of the father’s subsequent relationships that there was no evidence that that relationship was characterised by violence, would that reduce that assessment of risk?---it may. it may. in terms of “may”, what would you need to see? is there any factors you would see that would actually reduce that risk? i know it’s difficult question, sorry? yes.---well, clearly, the capacity to conduct further intimate relationships without violence would – would lend some reassurance that the children, for example, wouldn’t be exposed to – to further violence.
and, in terms of the concern about the father undermining the mother’s parenting – and accept from me the father said under oath that – or gave evidence which we summarise as he accepts and understands the importance of the mother’s role, coupled with the fact he doesn’t seek orders either for equal share of parental authority or to displace her as primary carer, does that give you some satisfaction that he’s less likely to undermine that role?---yes. and, in terms of that satisfaction of not undermining the role, would that – if the court finds that there’s no unacceptable risk at present – that the time can expand to overnight?---yes.
and if you’re add in to the mix – if i ask you to assume that the father, having been accused of cheating on the mother, had brandished the knife at her and intentionally, at that time, wanted to scare the mother, does that make any difference or does that assist?---i guess we all do things when we’re very aroused – and i – i understand that there is a diagnosis of ptsd, which means that, really – basically means that someone’s arousal levels are already high and easily become higher – that we all do things when we’re aroused that we might regret. however, this is of a level of seriousness that’s – that’s concerning. whether it was – whether it was to, as you say – brandishing a knife is – is always going to be seriously concerning, yes.
now, in paragraph 76 of your first report, in the last sentence you discuss overnight time possibly – you say it may be considered after a further six months of daytime contact. are you able to give an indication of what factors might lead to that being possible or not possible? ---well, the sorts of things that i would usually be looking for are very positive supervision reports, that the children are happy both to go, and positively even more importantly, when they come home that their behaviour isn’t unduly disturbed, their sleeping, their eating, whatever, is not unduly disturbed. they’re the sorts of things that i would look at before recommending increasing time or – or perhaps moving to overnight time.
relevant legal principles
the best interests of the child
section 60cc considerations
subsection (2a): the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents: a primary consideration
subsection (2b): the need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.  the father’s demonstration of some insight into his past family violence, as discussed above, (b) the positive supervised time spent between the children and the father, and the children’s seamless transition back into the mother’s primary care from such time, (c) there is no significant evidence indicating that the father has acted adversely towards the mother (or others, including his more recent partner) post separation to date, a period of 5 years, such as through physical violence, harassment or stalking, and no party submitted to the contrary. the court also accepts the father’s evidence in this context, (d) the icl’s proposed minute of order provide for a prolonged period of day-time time only, the commencement of overnight time only starts in january 2025 and provided the father has completed the 1-2-3 magic parenting course, this overnight time is for one night only each alternate weekend, it is only from the beginning of term 1 2026 that school holiday block time commences and which is limited to one week during short school holidays and two weeks during december school holidays, and changeovers will not involve face to face meetings between the parties, (e) the icl’s proposed minute of order provide for the mother being required to complete a keeping in contact program within 12 months of the court’s orders, (f) the court proposes to order a restraint upon either party administering physical or corporal punishment on either of the children or permitting any third person to do so, and the court is of the view that there is a significant prospect that the parties will obey such a restraint order, (g) the father adopted the icl’s proposed minute of order as his own, noting that his original sought final parenting orders in his case outline was somewhat more generous in respect to time between the children and the father, (h) the father’s demeanour when giving oral evidence and being cross-examined on contentious issues was one of relative calm - he displayed no anger or aggression, (i) the mother should be able to cope emotionally with the children spending time with the father pursuant to the icl’s proposed minute of order (and see below), (j) the father sees his local gp regularly for support, (k) the positive opinions and comments of mr e and dr o (psychologists) in relation to the father’s mental health prognosis and future ability to manage stressors appropriately.   the positive supervised time spent between the children and the father, and the children’s seamless transition back into the mother’s primary care from such time, (c) there is no significant evidence indicating that the father has acted adversely towards the mother (or others, including his more recent partner) post separation to date, a period of 5 years, such as through physical violence, harassment or stalking, and no party submitted to the contrary. the court also accepts the father’s evidence in this context, (d) the icl’s proposed minute of order provide for a prolonged period of day-time time only, the commencement of overnight time only starts in january 2025 and provided the father has completed the 1-2-3 magic parenting course, this overnight time is for one night only each alternate weekend, it is only from the beginning of term 1 2026 that school holiday block time commences and which is limited to one week during short school holidays and two weeks during december school holidays, and changeovers will not involve face to face meetings between the parties, (e) the icl’s proposed minute of order provide for the mother being required to complete a keeping in contact program within 12 months of the court’s orders, (f) the court proposes to order a restraint upon either party administering physical or corporal punishment on either of the children or permitting any third person to do so, and the court is of the view that there is a significant prospect that the parties will obey such a restraint order, (g) the father adopted the icl’s proposed minute of order as his own, noting that his original sought final parenting orders in his case outline was somewhat more generous in respect to time between the children and the father, (h) the father’s demeanour when giving oral evidence and being cross-examined on contentious issues was one of relative calm - he displayed no anger or aggression, (i) the mother should be able to cope emotionally with the children spending time with the father pursuant to the icl’s proposed minute of order (and see below), (j) the father sees his local gp regularly for support, (k) the positive opinions and comments of mr e and dr o (psychologists) in relation to the father’s mental health prognosis and future ability to manage stressors appropriately.   there is no significant evidence indicating that the father has acted adversely towards the mother (or others, including his more recent partner) post separation to date, a period of 5 years, such as through physical violence, harassment or stalking, and no party submitted to the contrary. the court also accepts the father’s evidence in this context, (d) the icl’s proposed minute of order provide for a prolonged period of day-time time only, the commencement of overnight time only starts in january 2025 and provided the father has completed the 1-2-3 magic parenting course, this overnight time is for one night only each alternate weekend, it is only from the beginning of term 1 2026 that school holiday block time commences and which is limited to one week during short school holidays and two weeks during december school holidays, and changeovers will not involve face to face meetings between the parties, (e) the icl’s proposed minute of order provide for the mother being required to complete a keeping in contact program within 12 months of the court’s orders, (f) the court proposes to order a restraint upon either party administering physical or corporal punishment on either of the children or permitting any third person to do so, and the court is of the view that there is a significant prospect that the parties will obey such a restraint order, (g) the father adopted the icl’s proposed minute of order as his own, noting that his original sought final parenting orders in his case outline was somewhat more generous in respect to time between the children and the father, (h) the father’s demeanour when giving oral evidence and being cross-examined on contentious issues was one of relative calm - he displayed no anger or aggression, (i) the mother should be able to cope emotionally with the children spending time with the father pursuant to the icl’s proposed minute of order (and see below), (j) the father sees his local gp regularly for support, (k) the positive opinions and comments of mr e and dr o (psychologists) in relation to the father’s mental health prognosis and future ability to manage stressors appropriately.   the icl’s proposed minute of order provide for a prolonged period of day-time time only, the commencement of overnight time only starts in january 2025 and provided the father has completed the 1-2-3 magic parenting course, this overnight time is for one night only each alternate weekend, it is only from the beginning of term 1 2026 that school holiday block time commences and which is limited to one week during short school holidays and two weeks during december school holidays, and changeovers will not involve face to face meetings between the parties, (e) the icl’s proposed minute of order provide for the mother being required to complete a keeping in contact program within 12 months of the court’s orders, (f) the court proposes to order a restraint upon either party administering physical or corporal punishment on either of the children or permitting any third person to do so, and the court is of the view that there is a significant prospect that the parties will obey such a restraint order, (g) the father adopted the icl’s proposed minute of order as his own, noting that his original sought final parenting orders in his case outline was somewhat more generous in respect to time between the children and the father, (h) the father’s demeanour when giving oral evidence and being cross-examined on contentious issues was one of relative calm - he displayed no anger or aggression, (i) the mother should be able to cope emotionally with the children spending time with the father pursuant to the icl’s proposed minute of order (and see below), (j) the father sees his local gp regularly for support, (k) the positive opinions and comments of mr e and dr o (psychologists) in relation to the father’s mental health prognosis and future ability to manage stressors appropriately.   the icl’s proposed minute of order provide for the mother being required to complete a keeping in contact program within 12 months of the court’s orders, (f) the court proposes to order a restraint upon either party administering physical or corporal punishment on either of the children or permitting any third person to do so, and the court is of the view that there is a significant prospect that the parties will obey such a restraint order, (g) the father adopted the icl’s proposed minute of order as his own, noting that his original sought final parenting orders in his case outline was somewhat more generous in respect to time between the children and the father, (h) the father’s demeanour when giving oral evidence and being cross-examined on contentious issues was one of relative calm - he displayed no anger or aggression, (i) the mother should be able to cope emotionally with the children spending time with the father pursuant to the icl’s proposed minute of order (and see below), (j) the father sees his local gp regularly for support, (k) the positive opinions and comments of mr e and dr o (psychologists) in relation to the father’s mental health prognosis and future ability to manage stressors appropriately.   the court proposes to order a restraint upon either party administering physical or corporal punishment on either of the children or permitting any third person to do so, and the court is of the view that there is a significant prospect that the parties will obey such a restraint order, (g) the father adopted the icl’s proposed minute of order as his own, noting that his original sought final parenting orders in his case outline was somewhat more generous in respect to time between the children and the father, (h) the father’s demeanour when giving oral evidence and being cross-examined on contentious issues was one of relative calm - he displayed no anger or aggression, (i) the mother should be able to cope emotionally with the children spending time with the father pursuant to the icl’s proposed minute of order (and see below), (j) the father sees his local gp regularly for support, (k) the positive opinions and comments of mr e and dr o (psychologists) in relation to the father’s mental health prognosis and future ability to manage stressors appropriately.   the father adopted the icl’s proposed minute of order as his own, noting that his original sought final parenting orders in his case outline was somewhat more generous in respect to time between the children and the father, (h) the father’s demeanour when giving oral evidence and being cross-examined on contentious issues was one of relative calm - he displayed no anger or aggression, (i) the mother should be able to cope emotionally with the children spending time with the father pursuant to the icl’s proposed minute of order (and see below), (j) the father sees his local gp regularly for support, (k) the positive opinions and comments of mr e and dr o (psychologists) in relation to the father’s mental health prognosis and future ability to manage stressors appropriately.   the father’s demeanour when giving oral evidence and being cross-examined on contentious issues was one of relative calm - he displayed no anger or aggression, (i) the mother should be able to cope emotionally with the children spending time with the father pursuant to the icl’s proposed minute of order (and see below), (j) the father sees his local gp regularly for support, (k) the positive opinions and comments of mr e and dr o (psychologists) in relation to the father’s mental health prognosis and future ability to manage stressors appropriately.   the mother should be able to cope emotionally with the children spending time with the father pursuant to the icl’s proposed minute of order (and see below), (j) the father sees his local gp regularly for support, (k) the positive opinions and comments of mr e and dr o (psychologists) in relation to the father’s mental health prognosis and future ability to manage stressors appropriately.   the father sees his local gp regularly for support, (k) the positive opinions and comments of mr e and dr o (psychologists) in relation to the father’s mental health prognosis and future ability to manage stressors appropriately.   the positive opinions and comments of mr e and dr o (psychologists) in relation to the father’s mental health prognosis and future ability to manage stressors appropriately.
section 60cc(3) - additional considerations  any views expressed by the child and any factors (such as the child maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to the child’s views the nature of the relationship of the child with each of the child’s parents, and other persons (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) the extent to which each of the child’s parents has taken or failed to take the opportunity, to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation to the child, and to spend time with the child, and to communicate with the child  the extent to which each of the child’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the child the likely effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, including the likely effect on the child of any separation from either of his or her parents, or any other child, or other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child), with whom he or she has been living  the practical difficulty and expense of a child spending time with and communicating with the parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the child’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis the capacity of: (i) each of the child’s parents, and (ii) any other person (including any grandparent or other relative of the child) to provide for the needs of the child, including emotional and intellectual needs the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of the child and of either of the child’s parents, and any other characteristics of the child that the court thinks are relevant  if the child is an aboriginal child or a torres strait islander child: the child’s right to enjoy his or her aboriginal or torres strait islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other people who share that culture), and the likely impact any proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right the attitude to the child, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the child's parents  any family violence involving the child or a member of the child's family if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the child or a member of the child’s family – any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the following: the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, any other relevant matter  whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
m) any other fact or circumstance that the court thinks is relevant
parental responsibility
summary
however, the father shall not approach the mother at any such event.
associate: dated: 9 may 2023
dated: 9 may 2023