last updated: 28 june 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
mohsen & collings (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 572
orders
the court orders that:
reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
introduction
background
i do not know where the child and mother reside and have not seen my grandson since july 2000 and 13th. it is difficult to report to outside authority in this situation. a mental health assessment of [b] is required to determine the extent of the psychological harm to the child’s development, mental health and overall well-being.
the legal principles
no reasonable prospect of successfully prosecuting proceedings (2) the court may make a decree for one party against another in relation to the whole or any part of a proceedings if: (a) the first party is defending the proceedings or that part of the proceedings, and (b) the court is satisfied that the other party has no reasonable prospect of successfully prosecuting the proceedings or that part of the proceedings. when there is no reasonable prospect of success (3) for the purposes of this section, a defence or proceedings or part of proceedings need not be:   the first party is defending the proceedings or that part of the proceedings, and (b) the court is satisfied that the other party has no reasonable prospect of successfully prosecuting the proceedings or that part of the proceedings.   the court is satisfied that the other party has no reasonable prospect of successfully prosecuting the proceedings or that part of the proceedings.   hopeless, or (b) bound to fail,
to have no reasonable prospect of success.
1. it is a serious matter to deprive a person of access to the courts of law for it is there that the rule of law is upheld, including against government and other powerful interests. this is why relief... is rarely and sparingly provided. 2. to secure such relief, the party seeking it must show that it is clear, on the face of the opponent's documents, that the opponent lacks a reasonable cause of action or is advancing a claim that is clearly frivolous or vexatious. 3. an opinion of the court that a case appears weak and such that it is unlikely to succeed is not, alone, sufficient to warrant summary termination. even a weak case is entitled to the time of a court. experience teaches that the concentration of attention, elaborated evidence and argument and extended time for reflection will sometimes turn an apparently unpromising cause into a successful judgment. 4. ... if there is a serious legal question to be determined, it should ordinarily be determined at a trial for the proof of facts may sometimes assist the judicial mind to understand and apply the law that is invoked and to do so in circumstances more conducive to deciding a real case involving actual litigants rather than one determined on imagined or assumed facts. 5. if, notwithstanding the defects of pleadings, it appears that a party may have a reasonable cause of action which it has failed to put in proper form, a court will ordinarily allow that party to reframe its pleading... 6. the guiding principle is... doing what is just. if it is clear that proceedings within the concept of the pleading under scrutiny are doomed to fail, the court should dismiss the action to protect the defendant from being further troubled, to save the plaintiff from further costs and disappointment and to relieve the court of the burden of further wasted time which could be devoted to the determination of claims which have legal merit.’ (footnotes omitted)
the evidence
consideration
my son was poorly represented by his barrister, the barrister relied on the transcript of the criminal law proceedings, which were submitted as evidence instead of undertaking extensive cross examination of [the mother and the court child expert.] this resulted in allegations made by [the mother] (which were identical to those of the criminal proceedings) being accepted to have occurred.... on the basis that my son’s barrister had not appropriately challenged [the mother’s] allegations.
costs
associate: dated: 17 may 2023
dated: 17 may 2023
[1] see judgement of the full court in ritter and ritter [2020] famcafc 86 and beck v beck [2004] famca 92; (2004) flc 93-181[2] see harper j in pitman & hynes (no 2) [2022] fedcfamc1f 373.[3] section 117(1) of the act[4] penfold & penfold (1980) flc 90-800; [1980] hca 4