last updated: 28 june 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
namvar & pales [2023] fedcfamc2f 573
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
live with/spend time with  during school term time: (i) until the end of term 2 in 2023, from the end of school on friday until the start of school on monday each alternate weekend, with the first such occasion to occur on the next occasion that time would have occurred between the father and the child under the interim orders of 4 august 2020, and noting that such time is to occur so as to coincide with the time that the child’s maternal sibling z spends time with their mother. (ii) for the duration of term 3 in 2023, from the end of school (or 3:00pm if not a school attendance day) on thursday until the start of school (or 9:00am if not a school attendance day) on monday each alternate weekend. (iii) from the commencement of term 4 in 2023 and thereafter, from the end of school (or 3:00pm if not a school attendance day) on wednesday until the start of school (or 9:00am if not a school attendance day) on monday each alternate weekend. (b) during school holidays: (i) for the school holidays at the end of term 2 in 2023, from 3:00pm on the last friday of the school term until 4:00pm on the following wednesday, (ii) commencing in the holidays at the end of term 3 in 2023 and for each of the short school holidays at the end of terms 1, 2, and 3 thereafter, for one half of the school holidays as follows: for the first half of the school holidays in odd numbered years, for the second half of the school holidays in even numbered years, (iii) for the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2023, on a week-about basis with each of her parents as follows: the father having the first week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter, and the mother having the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter. (iv) for the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2024 and for each long school holidays thereafter, for one half of the school holidays in a block as follows: the father having the first block of time in 2024 and in each even numbered year thereafter, the father having the second block of time in 2025 and in each odd year thereafter. (c) for the purposes of order 3(a) and 3(b), the commencement and conclusion of the school terms and holidays above are determined by the reference to the school calendar of the school the child is enrolled in.   until the end of term 2 in 2023, from the end of school on friday until the start of school on monday each alternate weekend, with the first such occasion to occur on the next occasion that time would have occurred between the father and the child under the interim orders of 4 august 2020, and noting that such time is to occur so as to coincide with the time that the child’s maternal sibling z spends time with their mother. (ii) for the duration of term 3 in 2023, from the end of school (or 3:00pm if not a school attendance day) on thursday until the start of school (or 9:00am if not a school attendance day) on monday each alternate weekend. (iii) from the commencement of term 4 in 2023 and thereafter, from the end of school (or 3:00pm if not a school attendance day) on wednesday until the start of school (or 9:00am if not a school attendance day) on monday each alternate weekend.  ) for the duration of term 3 in 2023, from the end of school (or 3:00pm if not a school attendance day) on thursday until the start of school (or 9:00am if not a school attendance day) on monday each alternate weekend. (iii) from the commencement of term 4 in 2023 and thereafter, from the end of school (or 3:00pm if not a school attendance day) on wednesday until the start of school (or 9:00am if not a school attendance day) on monday each alternate weekend.  i) from the commencement of term 4 in 2023 and thereafter, from the end of school (or 3:00pm if not a school attendance day) on wednesday until the start of school (or 9:00am if not a school attendance day) on monday each alternate weekend.   during school holidays: (i) for the school holidays at the end of term 2 in 2023, from 3:00pm on the last friday of the school term until 4:00pm on the following wednesday, (ii) commencing in the holidays at the end of term 3 in 2023 and for each of the short school holidays at the end of terms 1, 2, and 3 thereafter, for one half of the school holidays as follows: for the first half of the school holidays in odd numbered years, for the second half of the school holidays in even numbered years, (iii) for the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2023, on a week-about basis with each of her parents as follows: the father having the first week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter, and the mother having the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter. (iv) for the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2024 and for each long school holidays thereafter, for one half of the school holidays in a block as follows: the father having the first block of time in 2024 and in each even numbered year thereafter, the father having the second block of time in 2025 and in each odd year thereafter. (c) for the purposes of order 3(a) and 3(b), the commencement and conclusion of the school terms and holidays above are determined by the reference to the school calendar of the school the child is enrolled in.   for the school holidays at the end of term 2 in 2023, from 3:00pm on the last friday of the school term until 4:00pm on the following wednesday, (ii) commencing in the holidays at the end of term 3 in 2023 and for each of the short school holidays at the end of terms 1, 2, and 3 thereafter, for one half of the school holidays as follows: for the first half of the school holidays in odd numbered years, for the second half of the school holidays in even numbered years, (iii) for the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2023, on a week-about basis with each of her parents as follows: the father having the first week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter, and the mother having the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter. (iv) for the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2024 and for each long school holidays thereafter, for one half of the school holidays in a block as follows: the father having the first block of time in 2024 and in each even numbered year thereafter, the father having the second block of time in 2025 and in each odd year thereafter.  ) commencing in the holidays at the end of term 3 in 2023 and for each of the short school holidays at the end of terms 1, 2, and 3 thereafter, for one half of the school holidays as follows: for the first half of the school holidays in odd numbered years, for the second half of the school holidays in even numbered years, (iii) for the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2023, on a week-about basis with each of her parents as follows: the father having the first week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter, and the mother having the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter. (iv) for the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2024 and for each long school holidays thereafter, for one half of the school holidays in a block as follows: the father having the first block of time in 2024 and in each even numbered year thereafter, the father having the second block of time in 2025 and in each odd year thereafter.  i) for the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2023, on a week-about basis with each of her parents as follows: the father having the first week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter, and the mother having the second week of the holidays and each alternate week thereafter. (iv) for the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2024 and for each long school holidays thereafter, for one half of the school holidays in a block as follows: the father having the first block of time in 2024 and in each even numbered year thereafter, the father having the second block of time in 2025 and in each odd year thereafter.  ) for the school holidays at the end of term 4 in 2024 and for each long school holidays thereafter, for one half of the school holidays in a block as follows: the father having the first block of time in 2024 and in each even numbered year thereafter, the father having the second block of time in 2025 and in each odd year thereafter.   for the purposes of order 3(a) and 3(b), the commencement and conclusion of the school terms and holidays above are determined by the reference to the school calendar of the school the child is enrolled in.
special occasions  at christmas each year: (i) from 12:00pm christmas eve until 12:00pm christmas day with the mother in even numbered years, and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 12:00pm christmas day until 12:00pm boxing day with the mother in odd numbered years, and with the father in even numbered years. (b) at easter time each year: (i) from 11:00am on good friday until 11:00am on easter sunday with the mother in even numbered years, and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 11:00am on easter sunday until 11:00am on the first tuesday after easter or the commencement of school on that day, with the mother in odd numbered years, and with the father in even numbered years. (c) if the child is not otherwise spending time with her mother on mother’s day, then the child shall spend time with the mother from 9:00am until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (d) if the child is not otherwise spending time with her father on father’s day, then the child shall spend time with the father from 9:00am until 6:00pm on father’s day.   from 12:00pm christmas eve until 12:00pm christmas day with the mother in even numbered years, and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 12:00pm christmas day until 12:00pm boxing day with the mother in odd numbered years, and with the father in even numbered years.  ) from 12:00pm christmas day until 12:00pm boxing day with the mother in odd numbered years, and with the father in even numbered years.   at easter time each year: (i) from 11:00am on good friday until 11:00am on easter sunday with the mother in even numbered years, and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 11:00am on easter sunday until 11:00am on the first tuesday after easter or the commencement of school on that day, with the mother in odd numbered years, and with the father in even numbered years. (c) if the child is not otherwise spending time with her mother on mother’s day, then the child shall spend time with the mother from 9:00am until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (d) if the child is not otherwise spending time with her father on father’s day, then the child shall spend time with the father from 9:00am until 6:00pm on father’s day.   from 11:00am on good friday until 11:00am on easter sunday with the mother in even numbered years, and with the father in odd numbered years, and (ii) from 11:00am on easter sunday until 11:00am on the first tuesday after easter or the commencement of school on that day, with the mother in odd numbered years, and with the father in even numbered years.  ) from 11:00am on easter sunday until 11:00am on the first tuesday after easter or the commencement of school on that day, with the mother in odd numbered years, and with the father in even numbered years.   if the child is not otherwise spending time with her mother on mother’s day, then the child shall spend time with the mother from 9:00am until 6:00pm on mother’s day. (d) if the child is not otherwise spending time with her father on father’s day, then the child shall spend time with the father from 9:00am until 6:00pm on father’s day.   if the child is not otherwise spending time with her father on father’s day, then the child shall spend time with the father from 9:00am until 6:00pm on father’s day.
changeover
international travel and passports  from january 2024 and annually thereafter either party is permitted to travel with the child to the country g in the december/january school holidays during the period that x is in that parent’s care pursuant to these orders. (b) each parent will travel with the child only to countries which are a signatory to the hague convention 1996 and with which the hague convention is enforced between that country and australia (c) the travelling party shall provide to the other party at least (8) weeks prior written notice of the intended trip specifying the date and time of departure, the means of transport and all details pertaining thereto including details of the airline with whom the child will be travelling, the intended destination, contact numbers and addresses for the child for the duration of the trip and the intended date and time of return. (d) that upon written notice being given by a party pursuant to the previous suborder, the other party shall within 14 days from the date of receipt of the said notice, provide written confirmation of their consent to the proposed travel together with the passport or passports which are held by that party. (e) during the period of travel, the travelling party will facilitate reasonable communication by the child with the other parent including telephone and video calls twice a week. (f) at the first changeover after return from the period of travel, the travelling parent shall return to the other parent the passport or passports which that parent is to hold pursuant to these orders.   each parent will travel with the child only to countries which are a signatory to the hague convention 1996 and with which the hague convention is enforced between that country and australia (c) the travelling party shall provide to the other party at least (8) weeks prior written notice of the intended trip specifying the date and time of departure, the means of transport and all details pertaining thereto including details of the airline with whom the child will be travelling, the intended destination, contact numbers and addresses for the child for the duration of the trip and the intended date and time of return. (d) that upon written notice being given by a party pursuant to the previous suborder, the other party shall within 14 days from the date of receipt of the said notice, provide written confirmation of their consent to the proposed travel together with the passport or passports which are held by that party. (e) during the period of travel, the travelling party will facilitate reasonable communication by the child with the other parent including telephone and video calls twice a week. (f) at the first changeover after return from the period of travel, the travelling parent shall return to the other parent the passport or passports which that parent is to hold pursuant to these orders.   the travelling party shall provide to the other party at least (8) weeks prior written notice of the intended trip specifying the date and time of departure, the means of transport and all details pertaining thereto including details of the airline with whom the child will be travelling, the intended destination, contact numbers and addresses for the child for the duration of the trip and the intended date and time of return. (d) that upon written notice being given by a party pursuant to the previous suborder, the other party shall within 14 days from the date of receipt of the said notice, provide written confirmation of their consent to the proposed travel together with the passport or passports which are held by that party. (e) during the period of travel, the travelling party will facilitate reasonable communication by the child with the other parent including telephone and video calls twice a week. (f) at the first changeover after return from the period of travel, the travelling parent shall return to the other parent the passport or passports which that parent is to hold pursuant to these orders.   that upon written notice being given by a party pursuant to the previous suborder, the other party shall within 14 days from the date of receipt of the said notice, provide written confirmation of their consent to the proposed travel together with the passport or passports which are held by that party. (e) during the period of travel, the travelling party will facilitate reasonable communication by the child with the other parent including telephone and video calls twice a week. (f) at the first changeover after return from the period of travel, the travelling parent shall return to the other parent the passport or passports which that parent is to hold pursuant to these orders.   during the period of travel, the travelling party will facilitate reasonable communication by the child with the other parent including telephone and video calls twice a week. (f) at the first changeover after return from the period of travel, the travelling parent shall return to the other parent the passport or passports which that parent is to hold pursuant to these orders.   at the first changeover after return from the period of travel, the travelling parent shall return to the other parent the passport or passports which that parent is to hold pursuant to these orders.
schooling
medical and dental care  ab dental in suburb c for her dental health, and (b) ac medical centre in suburb c for her general health.   ac medical centre in suburb c for her general health.
communication  becomes seriously ill, (b) is hospitalised, (c) is involved in an accident, in circumstances requiring the attention of a medical practitioner or admission to hospital/medical clinic.   is hospitalised, (c) is involved in an accident, in circumstances requiring the attention of a medical practitioner or admission to hospital/medical clinic.   is involved in an accident, in circumstances requiring the attention of a medical practitioner or admission to hospital/medical clinic.
restraints
reasons for judgment
judge morley:
introduction
the materials relied upon by the parties and the icl
the competing proposals of the parties and the icl
upon application to the court it is ordered: that all previous orders are discharged. that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for the child, [x] (“[x]”) born [in] 2016. that the child shall live with the mother and the father during school terms and during term 1, 2 and 3 short school holidays on an equal time basis as follows: 3.1. with the mother from 3pm friday or the conclusion of school until 9am or commencement of school on the following friday each alternate week, and in the intervening weeks, 3.2. with the father from 3pm friday or the conclusion of school until 9am or commencement of school on the following friday each alternate week, in the alternative: 3.3. in each week, with the father from monday after school (or 3pm if the child is not attending school until before school on wednesday (or 9am if the child is not attending school). 3.4. in each alternate week, with the father after school friday or 3pm until before school the following wednesday or 9am. that during the child’s december/january term 4 school holiday periods, when order 3 shall be suspended as follows: 4.1. in even numbered years, with the mother for the first half of the child’s school holiday periods, and 4.2. in odd numbered years, with the mother for the second half of the child’s school holiday periods. 4.3. in odd numbered years, with the father for the first half of the child’s school holiday periods, and 4.4. in even numbered years, with the father for the second half of the child’s school holiday periods. that the commencement and conclusion of the school terms and holidays in relation to order 3 and 4 above are determined by the reference to the school calendar of the school the child is enrolled in. that the child shall spend time with the mother and the father at christmas each year as the parties may agree from time to time and in default of agreement as follows: 6.1. from 12 pm on christmas eve until 12 pm on christmas day, with the mother in years ending in an even number, and with the father in years ending in an odd number, and 6.2. from 12 pm on christmas day until 12 pm on boxing day, with the mother in years ending in an odd number, and with the father in years ending in an even number. if [x] is not otherwise with the mother, the child will be with the mother from 5 pm saturday to 5 pm on mother’s day each year. if [x] is not otherwise with the father, the child will be with the father from 5 pm saturday to 5 pm on father’s day each year. that on the child’s and parent's birthdays, whosoever care the child is in, the other parent on that day shall spend time with the child from 3 pm until 7 pm on a weekday or 12 pm to 5 pm if on a weekend. 9.1. that each parent to facilitate [x] having telephone/mobile/skype communication with the other parent, 9.2. that each parent facilitate [x] having liberal communication with all siblings. international travel that the parties are each restrained from removing the child from australia without prior written consent of the other parent. that within 7 days of the date of these orders the father to provide all documents to the mother who will within a further 7 days sign all documents and provide any other documents necessary and return all documents to the father who will then do all acts and things necessary to cause the child’s australian and [country g] passports to be obtained and kept current at all times. that within 14 days of a request by either parent from the other parent to sign all documents and do all acts and things necessary to renew the childs australian and [country g] passports. that the mother retains the child australian passport and the father to retain the [country g] passport. that if either party wishes to take the child out of australia: 14.1. the father be permitted to travel with the child to the [country g] from 2023 and annually thereafter in the june/july school holidays for 14 nights. 14.2. the mother be permitted to travel with the child to the [country g] from 2023 and annually thereafter in the september/october holidays for 14 nights. 14.3. from january 2024 and annually thereafter either party be permitted to travel with the child to the [country g] in the december/january school holidays for 21 nights. 14.4. each parent will travel with the child only to countries which are a signatory to the hague convention 1996. 14.5. the travelling party shall provide to the other party at least (8) weeks prior written notice of the intended trip specifying the date and time of departure, the means of transport and all details pertaining thereto including details of the airline with whom the child will be travelling, the intended destination, contact numbers and addresses for the child for the duration of the trip and the intended date and time of return. 14.6. that upon written notice being given by a party pursuant to the previous order, the other party shall within 14 days from the date of receipt of the said notice, provide written confirmation of their consent to the proposed travel together with the passport or passports which are held by that party. 14.7. during the period of travel, the travelling party will facilitate reasonable communication by the child with the other parent including telephone and video calls twice a week. 14.8. at the first changeover after return from the period of travel, the travelling parent shall return to the other parent the passport or passports which that parent is to hold pursuant to these orders. the place of changeover of the child at the start and finish of spending time with the father, when not occurring at the child’s school, will be at [suburb r] ferry wharf. that [x] remain enrolled in [suburb aj] school and attend there until the conclusion of year 6. that each parent facilitate [x] undertaking the selective schools test in year 6 by signing all consent or other documentation necessary and if [x] is accepted into [ak school] the parties to enrol [x] at that school. that if [x] is not accepted for enrolment at [ak school] that she be enrolled in [al school] or [am school] to commence in year 7. that [x] attend one dental practice and the following medical practices, [ab dental] in [suburb c], [ac medical] in [suburb c] and each party be authorised to communicate and receive any documents or prescriptions from all treatment providers. that each parent is permitted to enrol the child in any extra-curricular activities during the time that the child spend time with them pursuant to these orders and must inform the other party of the time and event of that activity and list the other parents name, address, email and telephone number on the enrolment documents. that each parent is hereby authorised to communicate directly with any school attended by the child, to receive copies of any documents including reports and newsletters that are generally provided to parents, and to attend and school event or activity to which parents are generally invited, and each parent is to cooperate with the reasonable requests of the staff of the school in this regard. that the parties are each to notify the other by sms as soon as possible and within 24 hours of any significant illness or injury affecting any of the child while in their care, including advising all medical practitioners attended upon by the child and any treatment prescribed for the child or prescription medication prescribed, and to provide a copy of the treatment or medication to the other parent at changeover and the parties are each hereby authorised to speak directly with any health care provider who has been consulted in relation to any of the child to obtain information about the health and treatment of the child. that the parties are to provide the other within 7 days of these orders with an sms to be used for communication regarding urgent matters in relation to the child. that without admitting the necessity for such an order, each parent is restrained from: 24.1. denigrating the other parent or a person with whom the other parent has a relationship, in the presence or hearing of the child, or permitting the child to remain in the presence or hearing of any other person denigrating the other parent or person with whom the other parent is in a relationship with, with the parent’s knowledge or in their presence, 24.2. discussing the proceedings or any allegations raised in these proceedings with the child or permitting any other person to do so with their knowledge or in their presence, 24.3. permitting the child having access to any of the documents filed in these proceedings, 24.4. communicating any information intended for the other parent through the child, 24.5. causing the child to be a medium in any way to adult matters between the mother and father or between the mother and father and any other person, 24.6. discussing major long term matters with the child including living arrangements and schooling, until such issues have been raised and discussed with the other parent, a mutual decision has been reached and consent is given by both parties to those matters being discussed with the child or the parties agree to the matter being raised and discussed with the child. that pursuant to s.62b of the family law act, information about the family counselling services, family dispute resolution services and other courses, programs and services available, is set out in the fact sheet attached hereto. that pursuant to s.65da(2) of the family law act, the particulars of the obligations these orders create and the particulars of the consequences that may follow if a person contravenes these orders are set out in the fact sheet, attached hereto and these particulars are included in these orders. that all outstanding applications are dismissed.
respondent mother’s minute of order: the court notes that the following spend time orders with the father align to those of the mother’s other children [w], [y], and [z] ([x]’s maternal siblings). the court orders that: that all previous parenting orders are discharged. that the mother has sole parental responsibility for the [x] born 2016. that [x] lives with her mother. that [x] spend time with the father during school terms per the interim orders dated 4 august 2020 as follows: each tuesday from after school (or 3 pm if not a school day) until the start of school on wednesday (or 9 am if not a school day) each alternate weekend from 5:30 pm on friday to 4 pm sunday at any other time as may be agreed between the parties. school holidays that [x] spend time with the father during school holidays during year 1 until the commencement of school term 1, 2023 as follows: each tuesday from after school (or 3 pm if not a school day) until the start of school on wednesday (or 9 am if not a school day) each alternate weekend from 5:30 pm on friday to 4 pm sunday at any other time as may be agreed between the parties. ***please note: if more time than the current arrangement above during the school holidays is court ordered, the following is proposed to ensure [x] can cope with the new arrangement and that the transition to longer periods of time away from her primary carer is smooth for her: that [x] spend time with the father during school holidays during year 3 until the commencement of school term 1, 2025 as follows: each alternate week, from thursday at 4 pm to sunday at 4 pm. at any other time as may be agreed between the parties. that [x] spend time with the father during school holidays during year 4 and thereafter until the commencement of school term 1, 2028 as follows: each alternate week, from tuesday at 3 pm to sunday at 4 pm. at any other time as may be agreed between the parties. from the commencement of school term 1, 2028 and thereafter as follows: for the first week of the holidays in odd-numbered years and the second week of the holidays in even-numbered years, on an alternating week about arrangement for the long summer school holidays. at any other time as may be agreed between the parties. that notwithstanding other orders, [x] will spend time with both parents on special occasions as follows: if [x] is not otherwise with the mother, [x] will be with the mother from 9 am to 5 pm on mother’s day each year, if [x] is not otherwise with the father, [x] will be with the father to 5 pm on father’s day each year, [x] will be with the father from 12 pm on christmas eve until midday on christmas day in 2022 and in each alternate year thereafter. [x] will be with the mother from 12 pm on christmas eve until midday on christmas day in 2021 and in each alternate year thereafter. the place of changeover of [x] at the start and finish of spending time with the father, when not occurring at [x]’s school, will be the [suburb r] ferry wharf, (and the court notes that the precise start and finish times are dependent upon the realities of the [suburb r] ferry timetable.) that on any occasion a parent is unable to care for [x] overnight when [x] is in their care, they are to give the other parent first option to care for [x] overnight on that occasion. that each parent be permitted to enrol [x] in any extra-curricular activities during the time that [x] spends with them pursuant to these orders. that each parent is hereby authorised to communicate directly with any school attended by [x], to receive copies of any documents including reports and newsletters that are generally provided to parents, and to attend and school event or activity to which parents are generally invited, and each parent is to cooperate with the reasonable requests of the staff of the school in this regard. that the parties are each to notify the other as as soon as possible and within 24 hours of any significant illness or injury affecting [x] while in their care, including advising of any medical practitioner attended upon by x and any treatment prescribed for [x], and the parties are each hereby authorised to speak directly with any health care provider who has been consulted in relation to [x] to obtain information about the health and treatment of [x]. the parties are to provide the other within 7 days of these orders with an email address to be used for communication regarding non-urgent matters in relation to the [x]. each party is restrained from the following: using any form of physical discipline upon [x], speaking negatively about the other parent in the presence or hearing of [x], discussing with [x] any of the allegations raised in these proceedings in relation to either parent. the court notes that the following orders were recommended by the family report (2020): that [x] remains enrolled in her local primary school [suburb aj] school until year 7. that [x] is enrolled in her local high school for year 7-12, currently [al] school. that [x] attend one dental practice and one gp, and the court notes that [x] currently attends [ab dental] in [suburb c] and [ac] medical centre in [suburb c], and [region n] orthodontics. that the alternate weekends [x] is with the mother will be aligned to the weekends that [x]’s siblings [w], [y], and [z] are also in the mother’s care. international travel that the parties are each restrained from removing [x] from australia without the written consent of the other parent. that the australian federal police place [x] born 2016 on the airport watch list. that no international travel be permitted for [x] until she has reached the age of 12 years old and has expressed in writing to the icl the desire to travel. that the mother will sign all documents and do all acts and things necessary to cause [x]’s [country g] and australian passports to be obtained when she is 12 years old and thereafter kept current at all times. that the mother retains [x]’s passports for safekeeping. that if either party wishes to take [x] out of australia after she is 12 years old: each party will travel with [x] only during the periods which [x] ordinarily spends with that parent pursuant to these orders. each parent will travel with [x] only to countries which are a signatory to the hague convention 1996. the travelling party shall provide to the other party at least (8) weeks prior written notice of the intended trip specifying the date and time of departure, the means of transport and all details pertaining thereto including details of the airline with whom [x] will be travelling, the intended destination, contact numbers and addresses for x for the duration of the trip and the intended date and time of return. that upon written notice being given by a party pursuant to the previous order, the other party shall within 14 days from the date of receipt of the said notice, provide written confirmation of their consent to the proposed travel together with the passport or passports which are held by that party. during the period of travel, the travelling party will facilitate reasonable communication by [x] with the other parent including telephone and video calls where appropriate and not less than twice per week. at the first changeover after return from the period of travel, the travelling parent shall return to the other parent the passport or passports which that parent is to hold pursuant to these orders. if international travel is ordered by the court prior to [x] being 12 years of age and her giving her written consent to travel, the following orders are proposed to ensure her safe return to australia: the father is to pay (prior to departure from australia), a bond in the amount of $50,000 to be held in a trust account, specifically set up for this purpose. in the event [x] is not returned to australia pursuant to these orders, these orders give the mother access to the trust account and the $50,000 to engage a lawyer to start proceedings to have [x] located and returned to australia under the hague convention 1996. within 7 days after the safe return of [x]to australia, the father’s bond of $50,000 shall be returned to him. safety that the father be and is hereby restrained from doing the following: attending any property where the mother may reside from time to time. coming within 200m of any property where the mother may reside from time to time. approaching the mother or [x] except pursuant to these orders. costs that the father shall pay the mother’s costs of and incidental to this and all applications in this case syc3550 / 2017.
that the parties are each restrained from removing the child from australia without prior written consent of the other parent.
the proceedings  each alternate weekend from 5:30pm on friday until 6:00pm on sunday, (b) from 8:45am on each tuesday until 8:45am on wednesday,   from 8:45am on each tuesday until 8:45am on wednesday,   each alternate weekend from 5:30pm on friday until 4:00pm on sunday, (b) each week from after school on tuesday until the start of school on wednesday.   each week from after school on tuesday until the start of school on wednesday.
the evidence  was conceived in 2015 after a one-time encounter with [mr namvar]. [mr namvar] and i were not in a relationship at the time, nor after.
there was never a period of time when [mr namvar] was not spending time with [x] regularly, but in 2017, [mr namvar] filed court proceedings despite there was no reason to do so as i was following our original verbal agreement, and the subsequent ones reached by mediation.
i am also concerned that there is a risk that [mr namvar] would not return to australia if he took [x] to another country
citing that the father does not own property in australia, works for a country g based company, owns property in the country g, has his whole family in the country g, that his son o is 18 years of age and that:
... there are only a few years left before [o’s] siblings are free to move with [mr namvar], is a [country g] citizen and has access to substantial funds.
whilst the concerns they each raise have been taken seriously and to identify areas of concern, each parent would be considered ‘good enough’ and no one better than the other
the family report and the evidence of ms ah
as the youngest of seven children, [x] has a unique place in her family. she is much younger than her siblings which means that her interests and abilities will be markedly different to theirs over the next 10 to 15 years. that is not to say that she will not have interests in common with her siblings, but, for example, when her siblings are entering the later stages of childhood and begin to have more self-focus or focus outside the family unit open bracket adolescence), she may not have the opportunity to spend as much time with them and so building those relationships now will be important.   presented as a confident child and confident in her relationships with her siblings. the sibling relationship can form a lifelong support network if supported during the early years. ... the proposed additional time that [x] will spend with [o], [bb] and [cc] will help to develop those relationships further.
if [mr namvar] and [ms pales] do not alter their current approach to one another [x]’s experience will be confusing. she will be aware of her parents’ feelings towards one another and that is likely to make her feel uncomfortable and/or sad. this may lead to poor mental health. children exposed to ongoing parental conflict are highly represented in mental health services and experience conditions like anxiety and depression. it may be helpful for both parents to complete a post separation program or research information that explores the impact of parental conflict on children.  ] issue that could arise is what school [x] attendance. [mr namvar] and [ms pales] have not discussed this, but [mr namvar] had assumed that she will attend [suburb aj] school in 2021. [ms pales] has in fact enrolled [x] in [suburb aj] school already. if [x] lives predominantly with [ms pales], she should attend that school. orders that stipulate that she remain at that school unless both parents agree in writing further to change schools may avoid future litigation. orders that stipulate that [x] attend a high school agreed to by both parents, but failing agreement, the high school that she lives in the catchment area for i also avoid further litigation.
submissions
... in order to prevent further litigation and the need to return to court for future medical, dental, and education decisions, i am seeking sole parental responsibility for [x]’s medical, dental and education decisions for continuity of her care.
it is important that [x] returns to my care at 4pm on alternating sundays in order to provide more stability during the school week for her. this has worked very well for [x].
the law  whether the child spending equal time with each parent would be in the best interest of the child,[3] and (b) whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[4]   whether the child spending equal time with each of the parents is reasonably practicable.[4]
a discretionary judgment concerning the parenting orders necessarily involves, because of the focus upon the future, significant elements of value judgments, assumptions, necessarily uncertain predictions and intuition.[6]  ] what these definitions convey is that “meaningful”, when used in the context of “meaningful relationship”, is synonymous with “significant” which, in turn, is generally used as a synonym for “important” or “of consequence”. i proceed on the basis that when considering the primary considerations and the application of the object and principles, a meaningful relationship or a meaningful involvement is one which is important, significant and valuable to the child. it is a qualitative adjective, not a strictly quantitive one. quantitive concepts may be addressed as part of the process of considering the consequences of the application of the presumption of equally shared parental responsibility and the requirement for time with children to be, where possible and in their best interests, substantial and significant.  ] the act sets out in s 60cc several matters for the court to consider in determining what is in the child’s best interests but does not seek to mandate that any one or other matter becomes determinative in any particular case. for the purposes of this case the legislation requires that there be a primary consideration given to the benefit of the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the child’s parents but it does not purport to prescribe how that meaningful relationship is best promoted in the circumstances of any one case.
and later, at paragraph 36 said:  ] it seems to me that the final conclusion reached by the federal magistrate that the proposed relocation would jeopardise the relationship between the children and their father to an unacceptable extent was not at all consistent with the evidence that was before the federal magistrate. even if the move results in a diminution of quality of the relationship, what the legislation aspires to promote is a meaningful relationship, not an optimal relationship.  0] ... to be a meaningful relationship, it must be healthy, worthwhile and advantageous to the child... those adjectives mean that children need their parents to lead by example about self-discipline. children need to learn to develop the ability to relate to others. they need to learn about the privileges and responsibility which will devolve upon them as parents. those are fundamental parts of the meaningful relationship. ...
the benefit to be derived by child from sibling relationships is not a matter which could be the subject of judicial notice within section 144 of the evidence act 1995 (cth)
a concept that i find sufficiently closely analogous to the benefit to be derived by child from having a meaningful relationship with both parents.
it is not open to a judge to use section 144 of the evidence act to “inform” him or herself of matters in respect of which reasonable minds might differ.
section 60cc – the primary considerations
section 60cc – the additional considerations
any views expressed by x and any factors (such as x’s maturity or level of understanding) that the court thinks are relevant to the weight it should give to x’s views
the nature of the relationship of x with each of the parents and with other persons (including any grandparents or other relative of x)
the extent to which each of x’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues in relation x, to spend time with x, and to communicate with x
the extent to which each of x’s parents has fulfilled or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain x
the likely effect of any change in x’s circumstances, including the likely effect on x of any separation from either of her parents or from any of her half siblings with whom she has been living
the practical difficulty and expense of x spending time with and communicating with a parent and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect x’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of each of x’s parents to provide for the needs of x, including her emotional and intellectual needs
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background (including lifestyle, culture and traditions) of x and of x’s parents, and any other characteristics of x that the court thinks are relevant
the attitude to x, and the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of x’s parents
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child
parental responsibility
section 65daa – consideration of x spending equal time or substantial and significant time with each of her parents
conclusion
associate: dated: 18 may 2023
dated: 18 may 2023
[1] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65d(2).[2] family law act 1975 (cth) s 61da(4).[3] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(a).[4] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(b).[5] family law act 1975 (cth) s 65daa(1)(c).[6] grella & jamieson [2017] famcafc 21, [18].