last updated: 19 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
halsey & darlow [2023] fedcfamc2f 717
orders
the court orders that:
parental responsibility
permission to relocate the children
living arrangements during school terms
week 1 (3 night blocks)  from 4pm sunday to 9am wednesday with the mother, and (b) from 9am wednesday to 9am saturday with the father.   from 9am wednesday to 9am saturday with the father.
week 2 (4 night blocks)  from 9am saturday to 9am wednesday with the mother, and (d) from 9am on wednesday to 4pm sunday with the father.   from 9am on wednesday to 4pm sunday with the father.   on school days, at the children’s school and/or childcare, and (b) on non-school days, with the parent whose time with the children is concluding transporting the children to the other parent’s place of residence.   on non-school days, with the parent whose time with the children is concluding transporting the children to the other parent’s place of residence.
living arrangements during school holidays and christmas arrangements  with the father for the first half of terms 1, 2, and 3 school holiday periods in odd numbered years, from the conclusion of school or 3pm on the last day of school/daycare until the midpoint of the school holiday period, and with the mother for the second half. (b) with the mother for the first half of terms 1, 2, and 3 school holiday periods in even numbered years, from the conclusion of school or 3pm on the last day of school/daycare until the midpoint of the school holiday period, and with the father for the second half. (c) in the term 4 school holidays, as follows: (i) in odd numbered years, the father to collect the children on the friday closest to the end of term 4, and the children will remain in the father's care for one week and each alternate week thereafter. (ii) in odd numbered years, the mother to collect the children at the end of the first week of holidays on the friday from the father and the children will remain in the mother's care for one week, inclusive of christmas and boxing day, and each alternate week thereafter. (iii) in even numbered years, the mother to collect the children on the friday closest to the end of term 4, and the children will remain in the mother’s care for one week and each alternate week thereafter. (iv) in even numbered years, the father to collect the children at the end of the first week of holidays on the friday from the mother and the children will remain in the father’s care for one week, inclusive of christmas and boxing day, and each alternate week thereafter.   with the mother for the first half of terms 1, 2, and 3 school holiday periods in even numbered years, from the conclusion of school or 3pm on the last day of school/daycare until the midpoint of the school holiday period, and with the father for the second half. (c) in the term 4 school holidays, as follows: (i) in odd numbered years, the father to collect the children on the friday closest to the end of term 4, and the children will remain in the father's care for one week and each alternate week thereafter. (ii) in odd numbered years, the mother to collect the children at the end of the first week of holidays on the friday from the father and the children will remain in the mother's care for one week, inclusive of christmas and boxing day, and each alternate week thereafter. (iii) in even numbered years, the mother to collect the children on the friday closest to the end of term 4, and the children will remain in the mother’s care for one week and each alternate week thereafter. (iv) in even numbered years, the father to collect the children at the end of the first week of holidays on the friday from the mother and the children will remain in the father’s care for one week, inclusive of christmas and boxing day, and each alternate week thereafter.   in the term 4 school holidays, as follows: (i) in odd numbered years, the father to collect the children on the friday closest to the end of term 4, and the children will remain in the father's care for one week and each alternate week thereafter. (ii) in odd numbered years, the mother to collect the children at the end of the first week of holidays on the friday from the father and the children will remain in the mother's care for one week, inclusive of christmas and boxing day, and each alternate week thereafter. (iii) in even numbered years, the mother to collect the children on the friday closest to the end of term 4, and the children will remain in the mother’s care for one week and each alternate week thereafter. (iv) in even numbered years, the father to collect the children at the end of the first week of holidays on the friday from the mother and the children will remain in the father’s care for one week, inclusive of christmas and boxing day, and each alternate week thereafter.   in odd numbered years, the father to collect the children on the friday closest to the end of term 4, and the children will remain in the father's care for one week and each alternate week thereafter. (ii) in odd numbered years, the mother to collect the children at the end of the first week of holidays on the friday from the father and the children will remain in the mother's care for one week, inclusive of christmas and boxing day, and each alternate week thereafter. (iii) in even numbered years, the mother to collect the children on the friday closest to the end of term 4, and the children will remain in the mother’s care for one week and each alternate week thereafter. (iv) in even numbered years, the father to collect the children at the end of the first week of holidays on the friday from the mother and the children will remain in the father’s care for one week, inclusive of christmas and boxing day, and each alternate week thereafter.  ) in odd numbered years, the mother to collect the children at the end of the first week of holidays on the friday from the father and the children will remain in the mother's care for one week, inclusive of christmas and boxing day, and each alternate week thereafter. (iii) in even numbered years, the mother to collect the children on the friday closest to the end of term 4, and the children will remain in the mother’s care for one week and each alternate week thereafter. (iv) in even numbered years, the father to collect the children at the end of the first week of holidays on the friday from the mother and the children will remain in the father’s care for one week, inclusive of christmas and boxing day, and each alternate week thereafter.  i) in even numbered years, the mother to collect the children on the friday closest to the end of term 4, and the children will remain in the mother’s care for one week and each alternate week thereafter. (iv) in even numbered years, the father to collect the children at the end of the first week of holidays on the friday from the mother and the children will remain in the father’s care for one week, inclusive of christmas and boxing day, and each alternate week thereafter.  ) in even numbered years, the father to collect the children at the end of the first week of holidays on the friday from the mother and the children will remain in the father’s care for one week, inclusive of christmas and boxing day, and each alternate week thereafter.
it is noted that:  “school holidays” includes pupil free days and public holidays that fall within the school holiday period, (b) changeover is to occur no later than 3:00pm on the changeover day or failing agreement, on the day that is 12:00pm on the midpoint between the first and last days of the school holidays (“the midpoint day”), and (c) at the conclusion of the school holidays the usual cycle of time that the children spend with the parents pursuant to order 3 shall continue as if the school holidays did not occur.   changeover is to occur no later than 3:00pm on the changeover day or failing agreement, on the day that is 12:00pm on the midpoint between the first and last days of the school holidays (“the midpoint day”), and (c) at the conclusion of the school holidays the usual cycle of time that the children spend with the parents pursuant to order 3 shall continue as if the school holidays did not occur.   at the conclusion of the school holidays the usual cycle of time that the children spend with the parents pursuant to order 3 shall continue as if the school holidays did not occur.
schooling/childcare
extracurricular activities  that the parents do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to enrol x and y in sports at n sports centre from the commencement of the relevant term as applicable for extracurricular activities.
special occasions
in years when easter does not fall within the school holiday periods:   the mother shall have the children from the conclusion of school/daycare on the thursday before good friday and until 4pm on easter saturday, and the father shall have the children from 4pm on easter saturday until the commencement of school/daycare on the tuesday after easter monday.
mother’s day   from the conclusion of school/daycare or 4:00pm on the friday immediately preceding mother’s day until the commencement of school/daycare or 9:00am on the monday immediately after mother’s day.
father’s day   from the conclusion of school/daycare or 4:00pm on the friday immediately preceding father’s day until the commencement of school/daycare or 9:00am on the monday immediately after father’s day.
children’s birthdays   the father will organise a birthday party for each child's even numbered birthday. (e) the mother will organise a birthday party for each child's odd numbered birthday. (f) the parents will give each other one month’s notice of the birthday party dates. noting that, in practice, this will mean that each parent has one party each year to organise (for example, x will be 6 in 2023 and y will be 4 in 2024).   the mother will organise a birthday party for each child's odd numbered birthday. (f) the parents will give each other one month’s notice of the birthday party dates. noting that, in practice, this will mean that each parent has one party each year to organise (for example, x will be 6 in 2023 and y will be 4 in 2024).   the parents will give each other one month’s notice of the birthday party dates. noting that, in practice, this will mean that each parent has one party each year to organise (for example, x will be 6 in 2023 and y will be 4 in 2024).
other family events
communication   that each parent is restrained from making negative, derogatory or disparaging comments about the other parent or members of the other parent’s family or household or their friends or colleagues in the presence or hearing of either child. (b) that the parents shall: (i) keep the other advised at all times of their current residential address, email address and mobile telephone numbers. (ii) advise the other as soon as practicable in the event that either child suffers any illness or injury including details as to any medical practitioner, hospital or medical practice attended.   that the parents shall: (i) keep the other advised at all times of their current residential address, email address and mobile telephone numbers. (ii) advise the other as soon as practicable in the event that either child suffers any illness or injury including details as to any medical practitioner, hospital or medical practice attended.   keep the other advised at all times of their current residential address, email address and mobile telephone numbers. (ii) advise the other as soon as practicable in the event that either child suffers any illness or injury including details as to any medical practitioner, hospital or medical practice attended.  ) advise the other as soon as practicable in the event that either child suffers any illness or injury including details as to any medical practitioner, hospital or medical practice attended.
authority to third parties
passports
international travel   a flight itinerary from the airline of the proposed travel arrangements including the departure and return dates, (b) confirmation of valid travel insurance for the children for the duration of the intended travel, and (c) a telephone number that the children can be contacted on while travelling.   confirmation of valid travel insurance for the children for the duration of the intended travel, and (c) a telephone number that the children can be contacted on while travelling.   a telephone number that the children can be contacted on while travelling.
notation
reasons for judgment
judge betts
introduction
chronology of events
“urban family.”
i deny that in [late] 2020, [ms halsey] and i reached an agreement to relocate back to [city b], nor did we even consider that option.
the trial / material relied upon by the parties
the law
...the reality is that maternity and paternity always have an impact upon the wishes and mobility of parents: obligations both legal and moral, the latter sometimes lasting a lifetime, restrictive of personal choice and movement have been incurred. “relocation cases” are no different from other applications for parenting orders in that respect. like all applications for parenting orders, an application to have the children live with a parent significantly geographically remote from the other parent is to be determined by the children’s best interests. however, the issues in a “relocation case” are, by reason of the proposed geographical separation of parents from their children, often significantly more acute and all the more so in cases of proposed international relocation. and, of course, that same factor will usually render more acute the burden or burdens to be borne by one parent or the other, including restrictions on their freedoms.
best interests
autism spectrum disorder. persistent deficits in social communication and social interaction across multiple contexts as manifested by the following currently or by history (examples are illustrative not exhaustive, see text): deficits in social/emotional reciprocity ranging, for example, from abnormal social approach and failure to normal back-and-forth conversation, to reduced sharing of interests, emotions or affect, to failure to initiate or respond to social interactions. deficits in nonverbal communicative behaviours used for social interaction ranging, for example, from poorly integrated verbal and non-verbal communication, to abnormalities in eye contact and body language, or deficits in understanding and use of gestures, to a total lack of facial expressions and non-verbal communication. deficits in developing, maintaining and understanding relationships ranging, for example, from difficulties adjusting behaviour to suit various social contexts, to difficulties in sharing imaginative play or in making friends, to absence of interest in peers. restrictive repetitive patterns of behaviour, interests or activities as manifested by at least two of the following, currently or by history (examples are illustrative, not exhaustive): 1. stereotyped or repetitive motor movements, use of objects or speech... insistence on sameness, inflexible adherence to routines or ritualised patterns or verbal/non-verbal behaviour, (eg, extreme distress at small changes, difficulties with transitions, rigid thinking patterns, greeting rituals, need to take same route or eat food every day). highly restricted, fixated interests that are abnormal in intensity or focus, (eg, strong attachment to or preoccupation with unusual objects, excessively circumscribed or perseverative interest). hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory import or unusual interest in sensory aspects of the environment, (eg, apparent indifference to pain/temperature, adverse responses to specific sounds or textures, excessive smelling or touching of objects, visual fascination with lights or movement). symptoms must be present in the early developmental period but may not become fully manifest until social demands exceed limited capacities or may be masked by learned strategies in later life. symptoms cause clinically significant impairment in social, occupational or other important areas of current functioning. these disturbances are not better explained by intellectual disability (intellectual developmental disorder) or global developmental delay. intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder frequently co-occur to make comorbid diagnoses of autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability, social communication should be below that expected for general developmental level. challenges and support needs mobility although driving her son to daycare is essential, this involves a 30-minute drive twice per day. for [ms halsey], driving leads to burnout and head and shoulder aches. this is due to sensory overload (brightness of daylight), executive functioning challenges (intense focus and shifting attention) and proprioception issues. these challenges cause stress for [ms halsey] and, as a result, she has had a number of minor accidents and penalty notices. communication [ms halsey] struggles with expressive communication in all social settings, particularly in the workplace. she experiences social exhaustion and sensory overload after being around people. as a result of “masking,” [ms halsey] has been unable to express her own needs in professional and personal relationships. socialising [ms halsey] struggles with making and keeping friends and relationships as well as with managing her emotions. due to financial stress, [ms halsey] does not have a budget for social activities to meet other adults or to do relaxing activities. [ms halsey’s] established family and friends are interstate which has led to isolation. also, as mentioned above, [ms halsey] experiences social exhaustion after being around people in social situations and requires recovery time from socialising. learning [ms halsey] struggles with learning new skills and remembering information in the workplace, particularly when under stress. [ms halsey] is interested to educate herself further about how autistic people learn so that she can pass this information on to her manager. [ms halsey’s] learning struggles are due to challenges with executive functioning. she requires extra time and extra information to break down, understand and retain new information. she also struggles to learn with auditory input only and needs additional inputs, such as visual and tactile, to assist with learning. self-care [ms halsey’s] executive functioning challenges means that she finds shopping, cooking and meal planning challenging and the energy required to do it detracts significantly from her capacity to function in the workplace. [ms halsey] experiences strong sensory overload in supermarkets and often exclusively uses online orders when she can afford it. when overwhelmed and burnt out, she also struggles to meet her own needs and finds it difficult to regulate her emotions. self-management [ms halsey] experiences significant challenges with daily tasks and making decisions. [ms halsey] lives in a house prone to ant infestation so regular cleaning is a necessity and, with small children, this is exhausting for her. the lawn needs regular mowing to prevent weeds overgrowing, which prevents outdoor play with her children. [ms halsey] is frequently overwhelmed by parenting challenges and money stress. [ms halsey] struggles to prevent clutter from accumulating and implementing effective house organisation systems. budgeting is an ongoing challenge and [ms halsey] spends the majority of each week without funds available, relying on the food shopping done earlier in the pay cycle to be sufficient. [ms halsey] prioritises feeding her children and limits her own food intake. [ms halsey] is regularly arranging later payments on bills, cancelling non-essential appointments like the dentist or car repairs. conclusion and recommendations [ms halsey] meets dsm criteria for autism spectrum disorder. it is clear that she has struggled with her daily functioning over many years as a result of undiagnosed and now diagnosed autism. she struggles in all life domains and requires ongoing support. [ms halsey] struggles in the following situations: work - easily experiencing autistic burnout due to variety of factors associated with autism (social exhaustion, social expectation, sensory overload, executive functioning). sensory overload and sensitivities - this is possible in any public setting for [ms halsey] and, as a result, she often avoids going out. emotion regulation - when overwhelmed and burnt out, [ms halsey] struggles to manage anxiety and low mood. social situations - [ms halsey] experiences social anxiety due to a variety of factors associated with autism which leads to social exhaustion and withdrawal which is required for her recovery. [ms halsey] is also socially isolated. daily life tasks and planning: due to stress, burnout, executive functioning issues and anxiety about finances. [ms halsey] would benefit from applying for ndis funding. [ms halsey] would greatly benefit from support for improved functioning through psychology, occupational therapy, dietician, social access programs and home help such as cleaning and yard maintenance. this intensive and substantial support will allow [ms halsey] to continue to work and also manage her competing priorities which are her children, self-care and her home. additionally, support through ndis will allow her to achieve her personal goals in relation to mental health, community and social participation, communication and life administration tasks. please contact me if you have any further questions about this report.
dear [ms halsey], as we have discussed the remote working arrangement has not been as successful as we hoped. [professional roles] are fast-paced and challenging, involving close work with small teams in a highly agile environment. it is very difficult to perform these roles from home. we acknowledge your efforts to make the remote working arrangement a success. however, at this stage, we are unable to commit to permanency past the end of your contract in 2023.
hopefully she will also begin to make friends and create the lifestyle, including her work/family balance that she seeks. however, this remains unknown. if the mother is unable to create the lifestyle that she desires, and is unsuccessful in developing an appropriate support network, then her mental health may decline, and this could have a detrimental impact on her parenting capacity.
there are, however, some concerns relating to the mother’s mental health. she has described a history of depression and anxiety, and a recent episode of acute depression and heightened behaviour. the possibility of bi-polar 2 disorder is being explored.  interpose here that she has since been diagnosed with autism, as indicated, as well as adhd.]
it is it noted that the mother reported a recent period where she was crying continuously and could not get out of bed. it is likely that this impacted her parenting capacity and her ability to prioritise the children’s needs. however, when mental health is managed well and is appropriately supported, for example, by accessing professional interventions, medication when needed, a strong and well-developed support network, appropriate self-care and healthy lifestyle choices, such as appropriate nutrition and exercise and adequate sleep, mental health can be managed well. well managed mental health problems are not a barrier to adequate and appropriate parenting. it was the view of the report writer that the mother was an intelligent and insightful adult who is child focussed. she has, in the past, identified her mental health needs appropriately and accessed support when needed. she is currently engaging in these supports again, and she is aware of the importance of self-care and strong support.
there are enormous advantages to the children in having all of their family members available in the local area, and that the children gained a sense of identity from those relationships which was to their advantage.
if the mother was unsuccessful in obtaining appropriately supported employment in the [city bb] region, and she was under financial stress, that this would definitely impact her, as she is vulnerable, and that such stressors may continue and undermine her parenting capacity.
that a well-supported and mentally well mother for the children is in their best interests, and that the children’s long-term development and wellbeing is associated with their parents’ wellbeing and security. if the mother is prevented from proceeding with the relocation to [city b], it will cause her a great deal of distress, and she will likely need.....ongoing support in terms of counselling to assist her adjust and accept this restraint.
conclusion
the reality is that maternity and paternity always have an impact upon the wishes and mobility of parents. obligations, both legal and moral, the latter sometimes lasting a lifetime, restrictive of personal choice and movement have been incurred.
associate: dated: 19 may 2023
dated: 19 may 2023