last updated: 6 september 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
howell & howell [2023] fedcfamc2f 584
orders
on a final basis, the court orders that:
parenting
parental responsibility  the mother must notify the father of her proposed decision in writing not less than 28 days prior to making any non-urgent major long term decision for the children including all reasonable particulars about the issue, including the contact details of any proposed treating health professional, (b) the father must respond to the mother’s notification within a reasonable time, (c) the mother must give proper genuine and realistic consideration of any view expressed by the father in relation to the proposed decision, and (d) the mother must notify the father in writing of the decision within seven days of making it.   the father must respond to the mother’s notification within a reasonable time, (c) the mother must give proper genuine and realistic consideration of any view expressed by the father in relation to the proposed decision, and (d) the mother must notify the father in writing of the decision within seven days of making it.   the mother must give proper genuine and realistic consideration of any view expressed by the father in relation to the proposed decision, and (d) the mother must notify the father in writing of the decision within seven days of making it.   the mother must notify the father in writing of the decision within seven days of making it.
live with and spend time with orders   in week 1: from 3.00 pm on thursday to the commencement of school the following monday, unless monday is a non-school day, in which case the time shall extend to 3.00 pm, with the first occasion to occur on 1 june 2023, and (b) in week 2: from 3.00 pm on thursday to the commencement of school on friday, unless friday is a non-school day in which case the time shall extend to 3.00 pm, with such time to commence on 25 may 2023.   in week 2: from 3.00 pm on thursday to the commencement of school on friday, unless friday is a non-school day in which case the time shall extend to 3.00 pm, with such time to commence on 25 may 2023.   the weekend that occurs immediately after the making of these orders and every alternate weekend after that until y attains the age of 18 years shall be spent with the father, (b) the weekend that occurs a fortnight hence of the making of these orders and every alternate weekend after that until y attains the age of 18 years shall be spent with the mother, and (c) at the start of the next school term the underlying cycle of fortnights shall continue as if the holidays had not occurred.   the weekend that occurs a fortnight hence of the making of these orders and every alternate weekend after that until y attains the age of 18 years shall be spent with the mother, and (c) at the start of the next school term the underlying cycle of fortnights shall continue as if the holidays had not occurred.   at the start of the next school term the underlying cycle of fortnights shall continue as if the holidays had not occurred.   subject to order 10(e) below, the mother must send the children to school each thursday morning with all school uniforms/equipment that they are likely to require on fridays and, if the children are in the father’s care until monday, for each day of the weekend and monday, (b) on the next occasion that the children return to the mother, the father must return to the mother the items that it contained on its arrival on thursday in the same condition, save for fair wear and tear, (c) if a uniform/item of equipment that has been provided by the mother is lost, damaged or destroyed while in the father’s possession, he must replace the item as soon as possible, (d) if the mother omits to include an item that is required for use by the children while in the father’s care, she is to cause that item to be delivered to the front office of the relevant child’s school by 8.30 am the next day if it is a school day or by 8.00 am to the father’s letterbox if it is a non-school day, and (e) if the father enrols the children in an activity that occurs on and only on a thursday during school terms, then he shall be responsible for purchasing and maintaining the necessary uniforms/equipment for that activity and orders 10(a) to (d) above will not apply.   on the next occasion that the children return to the mother, the father must return to the mother the items that it contained on its arrival on thursday in the same condition, save for fair wear and tear, (c) if a uniform/item of equipment that has been provided by the mother is lost, damaged or destroyed while in the father’s possession, he must replace the item as soon as possible, (d) if the mother omits to include an item that is required for use by the children while in the father’s care, she is to cause that item to be delivered to the front office of the relevant child’s school by 8.30 am the next day if it is a school day or by 8.00 am to the father’s letterbox if it is a non-school day, and (e) if the father enrols the children in an activity that occurs on and only on a thursday during school terms, then he shall be responsible for purchasing and maintaining the necessary uniforms/equipment for that activity and orders 10(a) to (d) above will not apply.   if a uniform/item of equipment that has been provided by the mother is lost, damaged or destroyed while in the father’s possession, he must replace the item as soon as possible, (d) if the mother omits to include an item that is required for use by the children while in the father’s care, she is to cause that item to be delivered to the front office of the relevant child’s school by 8.30 am the next day if it is a school day or by 8.00 am to the father’s letterbox if it is a non-school day, and (e) if the father enrols the children in an activity that occurs on and only on a thursday during school terms, then he shall be responsible for purchasing and maintaining the necessary uniforms/equipment for that activity and orders 10(a) to (d) above will not apply.   if the mother omits to include an item that is required for use by the children while in the father’s care, she is to cause that item to be delivered to the front office of the relevant child’s school by 8.30 am the next day if it is a school day or by 8.00 am to the father’s letterbox if it is a non-school day, and (e) if the father enrols the children in an activity that occurs on and only on a thursday during school terms, then he shall be responsible for purchasing and maintaining the necessary uniforms/equipment for that activity and orders 10(a) to (d) above will not apply.   if the father enrols the children in an activity that occurs on and only on a thursday during school terms, then he shall be responsible for purchasing and maintaining the necessary uniforms/equipment for that activity and orders 10(a) to (d) above will not apply.
school holidays  in 2024 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 5.00 pm on the middle saturday of the holiday period to 9.00 am on the first day of the children’s school attendance in term 2, and (ii) otherwise with the mother. (b) in 2025 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 1 until 5.00 pm on the middle saturday of the holiday period, and (ii) otherwise with the mother.   with the father from 5.00 pm on the middle saturday of the holiday period to 9.00 am on the first day of the children’s school attendance in term 2, and (ii) otherwise with the mother.  ) otherwise with the mother.   in 2025 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 1 until 5.00 pm on the middle saturday of the holiday period, and (ii) otherwise with the mother.   with the father from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 1 until 5.00 pm on the middle saturday of the holiday period, and (ii) otherwise with the mother.   in 2023 and each alternate year after that, the children shall spend time with the mother from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 2 to 9.00 am on the first day of the children’s school attendance in term 3, and (b) in 2024 and each alternate year after that, the children shall spend time with the father from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 2 to 9.00 am on the first day of the children’s school attendance in term 3.   in 2024 and each alternate year after that, the children shall spend time with the father from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 2 to 9.00 am on the first day of the children’s school attendance in term 3.   in 2023 and each alternate year after that, the children shall spend time with the father from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 2 to 9.00 am on the first day of the children’s school attendance in term 3, and (b) in 2024 and each alternate year after that, the children shall spend time with the mother from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 2 to 9.00 am on the first day of the children’s school attendance in term 3.   in 2024 and each alternate year after that, the children shall spend time with the mother from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 2 to 9.00 am on the first day of the children’s school attendance in term 3.   in 2023 and 2025: (i) with the father from 9.30 am on the second monday of the school holiday period to 9.30 am the following monday and each alternate week after that, and (ii) otherwise with the mother. (b) in 2024: (i) with the father from 9.30 am on the first monday of the school holiday period to 9.30 am the following monday and each alternate week after that, and (ii) otherwise with the mother. (c) in 2026 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 5.00 pm on the midpoint of the holiday period until 9.00 am on the first day of the children’s school attendance in term 1, and (ii) otherwise with the mother. (d) in 2027 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 4 until 5.00 pm on the midpoint of the holiday period, and (ii) otherwise with the mother.   with the father from 9.30 am on the second monday of the school holiday period to 9.30 am the following monday and each alternate week after that, and (ii) otherwise with the mother.   in 2024: (i) with the father from 9.30 am on the first monday of the school holiday period to 9.30 am the following monday and each alternate week after that, and (ii) otherwise with the mother. (c) in 2026 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 5.00 pm on the midpoint of the holiday period until 9.00 am on the first day of the children’s school attendance in term 1, and (ii) otherwise with the mother. (d) in 2027 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 4 until 5.00 pm on the midpoint of the holiday period, and (ii) otherwise with the mother.   with the father from 9.30 am on the first monday of the school holiday period to 9.30 am the following monday and each alternate week after that, and (ii) otherwise with the mother.   in 2026 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 5.00 pm on the midpoint of the holiday period until 9.00 am on the first day of the children’s school attendance in term 1, and (ii) otherwise with the mother. (d) in 2027 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 4 until 5.00 pm on the midpoint of the holiday period, and (ii) otherwise with the mother.   with the father from 5.00 pm on the midpoint of the holiday period until 9.00 am on the first day of the children’s school attendance in term 1, and (ii) otherwise with the mother.   in 2027 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 4 until 5.00 pm on the midpoint of the holiday period, and (ii) otherwise with the mother.   with the father from 3.00 pm on the last day of the children’s school attendance in term 4 until 5.00 pm on the midpoint of the holiday period, and (ii) otherwise with the mother.   if the last day that one child is to attend school at the end of a school term is different to the other child, the “last day of the children’s school attendance” is the later of the two days, and (b) if the first day that one child is to attend school at the start of a school term is different to the other child, the “first day of the children’s school attendance” is the earlier of the two days.   if the first day that one child is to attend school at the start of a school term is different to the other child, the “first day of the children’s school attendance” is the earlier of the two days.   the father shall have the benefit of the additional night in the holiday period commencing in 2026 and each alternate year after that, and (b) the mother shall have the benefit of the additional night in 2027 and each alternate year after that.   the mother shall have the benefit of the additional night in 2027 and each alternate year after that.
special occasions  in 2023 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the mother from 9.00 am on christmas eve to 12 noon on christmas day, and (ii) with the father from 12.00 pm on christmas day to 5.00 pm on boxing day. (b) in 2024 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 9.00 am on christmas eve to 12 noon on christmas day, and (ii) with the mother from 12 noon on christmas day to 5.00 pm on boxing day.   with the mother from 9.00 am on christmas eve to 12 noon on christmas day, and (ii) with the father from 12.00 pm on christmas day to 5.00 pm on boxing day.  ) with the father from 12.00 pm on christmas day to 5.00 pm on boxing day.   in 2024 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 9.00 am on christmas eve to 12 noon on christmas day, and (ii) with the mother from 12 noon on christmas day to 5.00 pm on boxing day.   with the father from 9.00 am on christmas eve to 12 noon on christmas day, and (ii) with the mother from 12 noon on christmas day to 5.00 pm on boxing day.  ) with the mother from 12 noon on christmas day to 5.00 pm on boxing day.   in 2024 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the father from 9.00 am on good friday to 5.00 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) with the mother from 5.00 pm on easter saturday to 5.00 pm on easter monday. (b) in 2025 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the mother from 9.00 am on good friday to 5.00 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) with the father from 5.00 pm on easter saturday to 5.00 pm on easter monday.   with the father from 9.00 am on good friday to 5.00 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) with the mother from 5.00 pm on easter saturday to 5.00 pm on easter monday.  ) with the mother from 5.00 pm on easter saturday to 5.00 pm on easter monday.   in 2025 and each alternate year after that: (i) with the mother from 9.00 am on good friday to 5.00 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) with the father from 5.00 pm on easter saturday to 5.00 pm on easter monday.   with the mother from 9.00 am on good friday to 5.00 pm on easter saturday, and (ii) with the father from 5.00 pm on easter saturday to 5.00 pm on easter monday.  ) with the father from 5.00 pm on easter saturday to 5.00 pm on easter monday.   the mother from 5.00 pm on the eve of mother’s day to the commencement of school on the monday after mother’s day, and (b) the father from 5.00 pm on the eve of father’s day to the commencement of school on the monday after father’s day.   the father from 5.00 pm on the eve of father’s day to the commencement of school on the monday after father’s day.
changeover
communication
notifications and information exchange  a copy of all school reports, progress reports and photograph order forms, (b) notifications of all activities involving the children including those at which parents are invited or permitted to attend, and (c) notifications about parent-teacher interviews.   notifications of all activities involving the children including those at which parents are invited or permitted to attend, and (c) notifications about parent-teacher interviews.   notifications about parent-teacher interviews.   the nature of the accident, injury or illness, (b) the place to which the child has been taken for treatment, (c) the outcome of any treatment, and (d) the name and contact detail of the health professional who is treating the child.   the place to which the child has been taken for treatment, (c) the outcome of any treatment, and (d) the name and contact detail of the health professional who is treating the child.   the outcome of any treatment, and (d) the name and contact detail of the health professional who is treating the child.   the name and contact detail of the health professional who is treating the child.   any medication or other treatment that has been prescribed or rendered to the children, including information about the prescribed dosages of any medication and its possible side effects, (b) the date and time of all medical and allied health appointments for the children, and (c) the outcome of any medical or allied health appointment.   the date and time of all medical and allied health appointments for the children, and (c) the outcome of any medical or allied health appointment.   the outcome of any medical or allied health appointment.
restraints  discussing these proceedings with the children or with any other person in the presence or hearing of the children, (b) allowing or causing the children to gain access to any document produced in these proceedings or any legal correspondence, (c) making any critical or derogatory remarks about the other parent or member of that parent’s household or extended family to the children or to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children, (d) asking the children about their views or preferences about their parenting arrangements, (e) physically disciplining a child or causing or permitting any other person from doing so, (f) filming, photographing or recording the other parent without that parent’s express consent, and (g) causing or permitting the children from coming into contact with any weapon.   allowing or causing the children to gain access to any document produced in these proceedings or any legal correspondence, (c) making any critical or derogatory remarks about the other parent or member of that parent’s household or extended family to the children or to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children, (d) asking the children about their views or preferences about their parenting arrangements, (e) physically disciplining a child or causing or permitting any other person from doing so, (f) filming, photographing or recording the other parent without that parent’s express consent, and (g) causing or permitting the children from coming into contact with any weapon.   making any critical or derogatory remarks about the other parent or member of that parent’s household or extended family to the children or to any other person in the presence or hearing of the children, (d) asking the children about their views or preferences about their parenting arrangements, (e) physically disciplining a child or causing or permitting any other person from doing so, (f) filming, photographing or recording the other parent without that parent’s express consent, and (g) causing or permitting the children from coming into contact with any weapon.   asking the children about their views or preferences about their parenting arrangements, (e) physically disciplining a child or causing or permitting any other person from doing so, (f) filming, photographing or recording the other parent without that parent’s express consent, and (g) causing or permitting the children from coming into contact with any weapon.   physically disciplining a child or causing or permitting any other person from doing so, (f) filming, photographing or recording the other parent without that parent’s express consent, and (g) causing or permitting the children from coming into contact with any weapon.   filming, photographing or recording the other parent without that parent’s express consent, and (g) causing or permitting the children from coming into contact with any weapon.   causing or permitting the children from coming into contact with any weapon.
overseas travel   subject to order 34 herein, the travelling parent give the non-travelling parent at least 42 days’ notice in writing of the intended travel, country or countries of destination, proposed departure and arrival dates into and out of each country, (b) not less than 21 days prior to departure, the travelling parent gives the non-travelling parent: (i) a copy of all return airline or shipping tickets and a copy of a detailed itinerary, and (ii) a telephone number on which the travelling parent and the children can be contacted while overseas and all accommodation details.   not less than 21 days prior to departure, the travelling parent gives the non-travelling parent: (i) a copy of all return airline or shipping tickets and a copy of a detailed itinerary, and (ii) a telephone number on which the travelling parent and the children can be contacted while overseas and all accommodation details.   a copy of all return airline or shipping tickets and a copy of a detailed itinerary, and (ii) a telephone number on which the travelling parent and the children can be contacted while overseas and all accommodation details.  ) a telephone number on which the travelling parent and the children can be contacted while overseas and all accommodation details.
passports
section 121 of the family law act  the principal of any school attended by the children, (b) any medical, dental or psychological health practitioner who treats the children or any of them, (c) the australian passports office, (d) the british high commission in australia, and (e) the australian border force and any foreign equivalent agency.   any medical, dental or psychological health practitioner who treats the children or any of them, (c) the australian passports office, (d) the british high commission in australia, and (e) the australian border force and any foreign equivalent agency.   the australian passports office, (d) the british high commission in australia, and (e) the australian border force and any foreign equivalent agency.   the british high commission in australia, and (e) the australian border force and any foreign equivalent agency.   the australian border force and any foreign equivalent agency.
independent children’s lawyer
procedural orders
property orders
suburb g property   in payment of the costs of legal fees and disbursements incurred by the conveyancer acting for the parties, (b) in payment of the selling agent’s commission and any reasonable costs of sale incurred by the agent including marketing fees, styling costs and other agreed expenses, (c) in payment of any council rates, water rates or other ordinary adjustments on sale as advised by the conveyancer, and (d) of the balance: (i) 62.6 per cent of the net sale proceeds to the husband, and (ii) the remaining balance to the wife.   in payment of the selling agent’s commission and any reasonable costs of sale incurred by the agent including marketing fees, styling costs and other agreed expenses, (c) in payment of any council rates, water rates or other ordinary adjustments on sale as advised by the conveyancer, and (d) of the balance: (i) 62.6 per cent of the net sale proceeds to the husband, and (ii) the remaining balance to the wife.   in payment of any council rates, water rates or other ordinary adjustments on sale as advised by the conveyancer, and (d) of the balance: (i) 62.6 per cent of the net sale proceeds to the husband, and (ii) the remaining balance to the wife.   of the balance: (i) 62.6 per cent of the net sale proceeds to the husband, and (ii) the remaining balance to the wife.   62.6 per cent of the net sale proceeds to the husband, and (ii) the remaining balance to the wife.  ) the remaining balance to the wife.
weapons
other matters
mechanism and process of sale if parties unable to reach agreement  within 14 days of the due date, the parties shall agree on the appointment of a real estate agent failing which either party may apply to the president of the real estate institute of new south wales for a nomination and such nomination shall bind the parties, (b) within 14 days of the due date, the parties shall agree on the engagement of a conveyancer failing which either party may apply to the president of the new south wales law society for a nomination and such nomination shall bind the parties, (c) the parties must do all acts and things that are requested by the real estate agent and the conveyancer acting on the sale to ensure the orderly conduct of the sale including the preparation of the contract of sale, (d) the parties must sign all documents and pay any upfront fees required by the real estate agent for the purpose of giving effect to the sale, (e) the parties must co-operate with the real estate agency to ensure that the property is available to the agent to conduct inspections at all reasonable times, making all keys available to the agent and ensuring that the property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of any inspection by prospective buyers, (f) except as otherwise agreed, the property shall initially be listed for sale by private treaty at a price agreed between the parties but, failing agreement, either party may apply to the president of the australian institute of valuers for a nomination of a valuer, whose valuation shall bind the parties, (g) in the event the property has not sold within 90 days of these orders, the property, it shall be listed for sale by public auction with an auction to be scheduled within a further four weeks, (h) the reserve price for any auction shall be as agreed between the parties but failing agreement, as recommended by the selling agent, and (i) in the event the property is not sold at public auction, the parties shall continue to list the property for auction within a further three months of the first auction.   within 14 days of the due date, the parties shall agree on the engagement of a conveyancer failing which either party may apply to the president of the new south wales law society for a nomination and such nomination shall bind the parties, (c) the parties must do all acts and things that are requested by the real estate agent and the conveyancer acting on the sale to ensure the orderly conduct of the sale including the preparation of the contract of sale, (d) the parties must sign all documents and pay any upfront fees required by the real estate agent for the purpose of giving effect to the sale, (e) the parties must co-operate with the real estate agency to ensure that the property is available to the agent to conduct inspections at all reasonable times, making all keys available to the agent and ensuring that the property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of any inspection by prospective buyers, (f) except as otherwise agreed, the property shall initially be listed for sale by private treaty at a price agreed between the parties but, failing agreement, either party may apply to the president of the australian institute of valuers for a nomination of a valuer, whose valuation shall bind the parties, (g) in the event the property has not sold within 90 days of these orders, the property, it shall be listed for sale by public auction with an auction to be scheduled within a further four weeks, (h) the reserve price for any auction shall be as agreed between the parties but failing agreement, as recommended by the selling agent, and (i) in the event the property is not sold at public auction, the parties shall continue to list the property for auction within a further three months of the first auction.   the parties must do all acts and things that are requested by the real estate agent and the conveyancer acting on the sale to ensure the orderly conduct of the sale including the preparation of the contract of sale, (d) the parties must sign all documents and pay any upfront fees required by the real estate agent for the purpose of giving effect to the sale, (e) the parties must co-operate with the real estate agency to ensure that the property is available to the agent to conduct inspections at all reasonable times, making all keys available to the agent and ensuring that the property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of any inspection by prospective buyers, (f) except as otherwise agreed, the property shall initially be listed for sale by private treaty at a price agreed between the parties but, failing agreement, either party may apply to the president of the australian institute of valuers for a nomination of a valuer, whose valuation shall bind the parties, (g) in the event the property has not sold within 90 days of these orders, the property, it shall be listed for sale by public auction with an auction to be scheduled within a further four weeks, (h) the reserve price for any auction shall be as agreed between the parties but failing agreement, as recommended by the selling agent, and (i) in the event the property is not sold at public auction, the parties shall continue to list the property for auction within a further three months of the first auction.   the parties must sign all documents and pay any upfront fees required by the real estate agent for the purpose of giving effect to the sale, (e) the parties must co-operate with the real estate agency to ensure that the property is available to the agent to conduct inspections at all reasonable times, making all keys available to the agent and ensuring that the property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of any inspection by prospective buyers, (f) except as otherwise agreed, the property shall initially be listed for sale by private treaty at a price agreed between the parties but, failing agreement, either party may apply to the president of the australian institute of valuers for a nomination of a valuer, whose valuation shall bind the parties, (g) in the event the property has not sold within 90 days of these orders, the property, it shall be listed for sale by public auction with an auction to be scheduled within a further four weeks, (h) the reserve price for any auction shall be as agreed between the parties but failing agreement, as recommended by the selling agent, and (i) in the event the property is not sold at public auction, the parties shall continue to list the property for auction within a further three months of the first auction.   the parties must co-operate with the real estate agency to ensure that the property is available to the agent to conduct inspections at all reasonable times, making all keys available to the agent and ensuring that the property is in a neat and clean condition at the time of any inspection by prospective buyers, (f) except as otherwise agreed, the property shall initially be listed for sale by private treaty at a price agreed between the parties but, failing agreement, either party may apply to the president of the australian institute of valuers for a nomination of a valuer, whose valuation shall bind the parties, (g) in the event the property has not sold within 90 days of these orders, the property, it shall be listed for sale by public auction with an auction to be scheduled within a further four weeks, (h) the reserve price for any auction shall be as agreed between the parties but failing agreement, as recommended by the selling agent, and (i) in the event the property is not sold at public auction, the parties shall continue to list the property for auction within a further three months of the first auction.   except as otherwise agreed, the property shall initially be listed for sale by private treaty at a price agreed between the parties but, failing agreement, either party may apply to the president of the australian institute of valuers for a nomination of a valuer, whose valuation shall bind the parties, (g) in the event the property has not sold within 90 days of these orders, the property, it shall be listed for sale by public auction with an auction to be scheduled within a further four weeks, (h) the reserve price for any auction shall be as agreed between the parties but failing agreement, as recommended by the selling agent, and (i) in the event the property is not sold at public auction, the parties shall continue to list the property for auction within a further three months of the first auction.   in the event the property has not sold within 90 days of these orders, the property, it shall be listed for sale by public auction with an auction to be scheduled within a further four weeks, (h) the reserve price for any auction shall be as agreed between the parties but failing agreement, as recommended by the selling agent, and (i) in the event the property is not sold at public auction, the parties shall continue to list the property for auction within a further three months of the first auction.   the reserve price for any auction shall be as agreed between the parties but failing agreement, as recommended by the selling agent, and (i) in the event the property is not sold at public auction, the parties shall continue to list the property for auction within a further three months of the first auction.   in the event the property is not sold at public auction, the parties shall continue to list the property for auction within a further three months of the first auction.
ancillary orders
procedural orders
reasons for judgment
judge eldershaw:
introduction
documents
definitions   “expert” means dr e. . (b) “insurance” means the totality of monies paid to the husband subsequent to a statutory worker’s compensation claim and common law claim against the father’s former employer and its insurer. (c) “the property” means the former matrimonial home at f street, suburb g.   “insurance” means the totality of monies paid to the husband subsequent to a statutory worker’s compensation claim and common law claim against the father’s former employer and its insurer. (c) “the property” means the former matrimonial home at f street, suburb g.   “the property” means the former matrimonial home at f street, suburb g.
applications
parenting
property
background: property
2007
2010  about $30,600 was applied to the purchase of the property, and (b) about $31,000 was used to purchase motor vehicle 1, which remains an asset of the parties at the time of hearing.   about $31,000 was used to purchase motor vehicle 1, which remains an asset of the parties at the time of hearing.
2010 and 2011: workplace incidents
in 2007 he joined the [team]. this he described as being [a specialised team]. he said the [team] tends to be isolated from other [teams] within the [agency] and was difficult to join. he describes it as having a bullying culture, and particularly mentioned alpha males who would bully, and states that this behaviour would be condoned by [senior team members]. in 2010, he made complaints against a particular [team member] who, he believes, had taken a dislike to him. he describes a particular incident [...]. on returning to [the workplace], he said that the man in question raised a [firearm], pointed it at his head and pulled the trigger, and stated under his breath “next time it will be loaded”. [mr howell] did not report this incident, as he said that would lead to more problems within the [team] with alienation, and he did not want this. he said that he felt that he had already been alienated. there were other incidents as well. in 2011, there was another time when the group had been [engaged in an activity]. [...]. he said that a gun was pointed at his head by the same man and that those around him laughed. his response was that he became anxious and fearful that he would be killed at work. he was tremulous and he thought that he would not be supported or he might be killed by this particular man [at work]. he became more anxious at work and this led to difficulty in his functioning. he made notes regarding these incidents. he had attended his general practitioner and, at that time, it seems that his symptoms were similar to those he currently describes. he was unable to cope. he had a fear of being killed at work and he spoke to his [supervisor] about what had happened in case he was killed at work. he found himself tearful unreasonably in public places. there was sleep disturbance and problems in relating, and further events occurred. effectively, he appears to have been in a state of breakdown at this time. he was treated by his general practitioner and continued to work. he had ‘well checks’, where he spoke regarding the incidents. however was not as open as he states that he is now. he remained in the [team] until 2012, and had to get away. he joined [another team] and then undertook a course [in another role]. in 2016, he was referred to psychiatrist, [dr r]. different medications were tried and he settled on [a daily medication], which he said has been helpful. he describes himself as being on “a knife's edge, but getting by”. he is pre-occupied with anxiety and worry. [a publicised incident] brought the matter back to him again and he stated that the particular man involved in the incidents [...] was [involved in this incident]. outside of that, he said that he has been able to function in [other work duties]. however, internally anxious and disturbed. in the last eight weeks following his viewing of the documents in his application for [another department], there has been a re-emergence of the anxiety symptoms leading to state of breakdown. (as per the original)  .] as part of [mr howell’s] recuperation from his incident, [mr howell] was required to attend psychology and doctor’s appointments, which i took him to approximately fortnightly. at the time of [mr howell’s] more frequent medical appointments, i was working two (2) days per week and often had to take leave to take [mr howell] to his appointments. [...] prior to separation, [mr howell’s] coping strategy when he became angry was that he counted to three and attempted to walk away from the situation. prior to separation, [mr howell], on 3 or 4 occasions, simply left a social gathering and said to me words to the effect: “i can’t cope. i need to leave the situation.”...
2012 to 2019
...between 2012 and 2019, [mr howell] suffered from extremely low mood and persistent depression, and had no motivation or drive .... for example, whenever [mr howell] returned home he just laid on the ground after work and did not assist in any of the care of the children or any of the household tasks. between 2012 to separation in 2019, i was solely responsible for the care of the children, the care of [mr howell] and the household tasks such as cleaning, cooking, washing and other incidental and household chores. disappointingly, [mr howell] was not a hands on father and the children have always relied on my as their primary carer.
early 2017: medical discharge from public service
2017 to 2020: workers compensation and common law payments
31 december 2018: separation
since december 2018, i have been solely responsible for the payment of bills and insurance on the home, including maintenance and upkeep of the property.
december 2022: transfers from joint account
background: parenting
early 2016: firearms license application
july 2019
...i was speaking with [x] and [y] when [ms howell] quickly walked into the lounge room. in an angry, loud voice [ms howell] said, “... good, you can see the cousins and new babies every day then”. i said, “is there any way can work this out?” in an angry voice, [ms howell] said, “no, you haven't bought me flowers or done anything for me, i don't want another fucking baby”. i said, “we aren't going to have another baby”. [ms howell] said, “we aren't going to have a relationship. i have two dates this week when you have the kids. it's over, you have made it clear how you feel. go and get your vasectomy and you will never have to have any more kids”. i left the kitchen and entered the lounge room, closing the door behind me. [x] and [y] were both sitting with me on the lounge. within seconds, [ms howell] opened the door quickly and burst into the room. she was extremely angry and stood over me as i sat on the lounge. she grabbed my keys and a finger bun i had bought the children and yelled, “get out, get out, i don't want you here, you can't threaten me like that”. she quickly walked towards the exit of the room. i stood up. she turned and advanced towards me very quickly and with an angry expression. i said, “calm down please, don't do this in front of the kids”. [ms howell] yelled, “get out, you don't want any more fucking kids, get out!” [ms howell] stormed out of the room and down-stairs with heavy steps as she went. i heard the front door open. i followed her and saw her throw my keys outside through the front door. [x] jumped up off the lounge and ran behind it as i heard [ms howell’s] heavy steps coming back up the internal stairs. she walked towards me yelling. her face was red and she was waving her arms around in an aggressive manner with fists clenched yelling repeatedly, “get out, get out, it's over, i don't want another fucking baby, get out”. i said, “calm down, don't do this in front of the kids”. [x] came out from behind the lounge and gave [ms howell] a cuddle. i said goodbye to [x] and [y] and left. (as per the original)
1 august 2019: text messages
...things are very real now and i am not gonna make anything easy for you!!! if you are so well and can be looking after kids and taking them out, how can you be on permanent disability???? (as per the original)   per the original)
late 2019
...as you indicated, [ms howell] presented with anxiety and adjustment disorder in the context of her husband’s mental illness and consequent relationship difficulties. therapy was within a cbt/act framework focussing on psychoeducation, problem solving and modifying unhelpful thinking styles. [ms howell] did not return following her third session after which she was due to visit family in the uk. as i am now reviewing my cases, i will close her file...
early 2020
hi, [y] has been with his dad, he has been doing all the on line work, but his dad, [mr howell], doesn’t have the see saw app to post at the moment, i will encourage him to download it. i will be having [y] thurs/fri so will post work on those days... (as per the original)
april 2020  and [y] were with me on wednesday 15/4/20 until [ms howell] collected them after work. during the day, [x], [y] and i made up cheap little photo albums i had bought from kmart containing several photos of them, myself, my parents and their cousins doing things together. [x] put hers under her jumper while she was walking down the driveway [...] to [ms howell’s] car. i asked her “why are you doing that?” to which she responded: “so mummy doesn’t see it.” we opened the back left door to [the car] and the kids got in. in an angry aggressive tone, [ms howell] said, “i don’t want the kids to have those. i don’t want any photos of you in the house. this is all your fault. you have caused all this. you have caused this damage to the kids.” as [ms howell] was yelling this, both [x] and [y] were crying with tears rolling down their faces.” (as per the original)
july 2020  july 2020], [x] said to me words to the effect: “when i am older, i can choose who i want to live with.” i said “why would you say that?” [x] responded: “that’s what mummy said.” at 6.43pm, i sent [ms howell] an sms: “why would [x] tell me that she can choose she wanst to live with when she is older? answer – because you said that to her. don’t you think that is damaging?” at 6:46 [ms howell] responded: “....yes eventually when kid are older i know they will choose to live with me!” (as per the original)
august 2020
about 1:50pm [on a day in august 2020], [y] and i arrived at the family home after being at [y’s sporting] match. when we arrived, [ms howell] prevented me from walking up the stairs by standing in my way. i needed the toilet and she allowed me to use the downstairs toilet. i had a conversation with her. i said, “why does your lawyer want the medical records from [...]?” [ms howell] said, “you caused all this, but at least you got your pay out and never have to have any more kids”. i said, “you know the only winners will be the lawyers, we need to try and mediate this”. [ms ms howell] said, “how can i do that? i tried but you wouldn't even let me take the kids to [the united kingdom] for a holiday”. i said, “it wasn't about the holiday. i was worried you wouldn't come back”. [ms howell] said, “i hate you. i wish i had never come to australia, i wish i had never met you”. i said, “[ms howell] you cant say that. we've got two beautiful kids that we wouldn't have had”. [ms howell] said, “i wish you were dead. it would be so much better if you weren't here”. i said, “you can't say that [ms howell], that's so wrong”. [ms howell] emptied the boot of her car. i said, “do you want some help”. she said, “no”. i left soon after. (as per the original)
may 2021
...i prepared the kids for school, dropped [x] to [her extra-curricular] at 8:30am and [y] at 9am. at 2:14pm [on a day in may 2021] i received an sms from [ms howell] which in part said, “so tell me why i should stay in australia...with no family ...”. i collected them at 3:15pm and took [x] to [sport] at [suburb aa] where i purchased her some uniform and equipment for an upcoming [event]. at 7:51pm i received an sms from [ms howell] which in part said, “i will fight to take the children with me bk to the uk. i'm sick of being in australia...”. at 8:11pm i received another sms from [ms howell] which in part said, “you will be much happier when you don't have to do anything for your kids because they are living with me in uk and can have a new dad over there. then you can enjoy being an amazing uncle with sisters kids”. i responded, “[ms howell], please stop. you are causing me harm with the constant threats and putting me down, especially when its to or in front of the kids”. at 8:17pm i received an sms from [ms howell] which in part said, “...i want to be completely away from you and family...i have absolutely nothing left to lose”. [y] and i collected [x] from [sport] at 8:30pm and we returned home. during this period, [x] was doing 16.5 hours of [sport] a week! (as per the original)
late may 2021
june 2021
at 11:50am on [a day in june 2021], i received a phone call from [ms howell]. she sounded upset and angry when she said, “i hate you so much for what you have done. i came here for you and now you have done this. when i go back to the uk without the kids and you have them full time you wont be able to cope. you're a bloody idiot [mr howell]. you caused all this with your bloody ptsd. you never did anything for me. i hate you”. i said, “please calm down [ms howell]. i haven't done this to hurt you. i have done this because i'm afraid you're going to take the kids to [the united kingdom], and i can't lose them”. [ms howell] said, “if i lose the house i'm going straight to the uk. you don't even want the kids full time”. i said, “[ms howell] please calm down. i am not saying i want the kids full time. i just can't afford to lose them”. [ms howell] said, “the kids want to be with me. they only want to be with me. i will get a children's lawyer so they can they that”. i said, “don't be silly, why would you want to drag the kids into the court process. that would be so damaging”. [ms howell] said, “i hate you so so much. i hope you die a really slow and painful death for what you have caused”. i said, “[ms howell] please calm down. you can't say that. did your lawyer give you my affidavit or is it the airport watchlist application?” (as per the original)
august 2021
... [x] expressed the view that her father does not love her as, much as he loves her brother [y], and complained her father will often show more interest in [y] and his activities, than he does with her. this belief appears to be weighing on [x], who indicated she does not feel as close to her father as perhaps she would like to.
child dispute conference: november 2021
december 2021
further to my correspondence dated 27 august 2021, i am writing to advise that [x] has now completed six psychological consultations. i am also writing to inform you that [x] is being discharged from [dd counselling]. unfortunately, i am unable to include an updated strengths and difficulties questionnaire (sdq) as part of this review. despite several sdq requests forwarded to [x’s] mother, [ms howell], some weeks ago for completion, none have been returned. should [ms howell] return to it at some point in the future, i will write to you again with the sdq results and compare them to those taken at the first consultation ...
early 2022: birthday party
...between [late 2021 and early 2022], i received a number of messages from [ms howell] regarding a sleepover birthday party [x] had been invited to by her school friend ‘[ee]', which was set to take place at [ee’s] home [in early 2022]. the party fell on the weekend i was due to have the children. between [late 2021 and early 2022], i told [ms howell] several times that i was not happy allowing [x] to stay overnight at the sleepover, but that she would be attending the daytime component of the party between 2:30pm and 6:30pm. i later changed the time of pick up to 9:30pm after i spoke with [ms ff], [ee’s] mum. about 2:30pm on [the day of the party], i arrived at [gg street, suburb g] to drop [x] off to the birthday party. i had a conversation with [ms ff]. about 7:59pm i received a phone call from [04...]. i answered and spoke with [ms ff]. [y] and i arrived at the party at 9:30pm as i had arranged with [ms ff]. immediately after stopping my vehicle in the driveway, i observed a male opening the front door which was illuminated from within. when the male exited the house, i saw it was [mr jj], [ms howell’s] current boyfriend. [ms howell] also exited the doorway. i was surprised they were there. [mr jj] walked part way down the stairs, standing on the left side of the staircase and above me, and extended his right arm out, blocking my access up the stairs. [ms howell] was standing behind him at the top of the stairs. [ms howell] insisted that [x] remain there overnight and that she would stay there with her. in part, [ms howell] said, “they are not happy for you to have [x]” and “i am not happy for you to knock on the door”. when [ms howell] said ‘they’ she was referring to [ms ff] and [mr jj]. [ms howell] insisted that she would stay overnight with [x]. several minutes into the discussion with [mr jj] and [ms howell], [ms ff] and her husband [mr kk], exited the home. [y] was holding my hand as we stood in the darkness on the steps of the home throughout this interaction. as a result of the conversation with [ms howell], [mr jj], [ms ff] and her husband, [y] and i returned to my car where i called the police at 9:53pm. [x] was being withheld from me. between 10:46pm and 11:03pm [ms howell] and i exchanged sms and whatsapp messages, during which she confirmed she would drop [x] to me the following day at 10:30am. at 11:05pm i called [suburb ll] police station and spoke with a male and cancelled police attendance. subsequently, [y] and i returned to my unit where i put him to bed. (as per the original)   howell] was asked about the events of [early] 2022 which resulted in his calling the police to [x’s] friends birthday sleepover. [mr howell] described the whole incident as ‘disturbing’. he clarified this to mean his belief that [ms howell] and [x’s] friends’ mother apparently conspiring ‘to keep [x] from him’. he reviewed that [x] was attending a birthday, that there was a sleepover, but he was not happy for her to stay for the sleepover portion. he declared that when he arrived to pick her up, [ms howell] and [mr jj] were present and while [mr howell] was holding [y’s] hand, they were preventing him from entering the property. he declared, ‘i think [ms howell] and [ee’s] mother had gotten together to make up a story about [x] not wanting to see me’. (as per the original)   howell] was asked about the incident in [early] 2022 regarding [x] wanting to sleep over at a friend’s home. she described [x] became emotional because she decided she wanted to stay at the sleepover. [ms howell] said she was contacted by the friend’s mother asking her to come over. she described that she arrived and wanted to negotiate with [mr howell], saying she would agree to also stay over at the house so [x] would remain supervised. she said that [mr howell] left, but called the police. she highlighted this as another example of the parents’ limited capacity to agree on the children’s social activity.   early] 2022, [mr howell] allowed [x] to attend a [...] party at [ee’s] house in [suburb g], however, he refused to let her sleep over with all the other girls. during the party, and around 8.30pm, [ee’s] mother and father called me (they were on speakerphone as i understand it) and said, words to the effect: “[x] is really upset and hysterical and is frightened of [mr howell] and asked that you come to collect her. we really don't feel comfortable handing her over to [mr howell] when he comes here at 9.00pm”. i went over and we tried to speak with [mr howell], however, [mr howell] just kept saying ‘[x] is not sleeping over, i am collecting her’. [mr howell] then attended the home at 9.00pm and appeared agitated and aggressive and had [y] with him. i recall that [mr howell] tried to enter the house, however, [ee’s] mother said to [mr howell], words to the effect: “please do not come in. [x] is really upset and wants to stay and she is scared of how angry you were when you were speaking to her on the phone”. [mr howell] then said in a very aggressive tone, words to the effect: “that is my daughter, i am taking her”. i then calmly said to [mr howell], words to the effect: “[mr howell] please, she is very upset and doesn't want to go with you. i will stay over to comfort her but i think its best that you leave and put [y] to bed”. [mr howell] then said: “fine, i am calling the police”. [ee’s] parents had asked me to stay during the sleepover as [mr howell] was so angry on the phone and they were concerned that the police would attend and there would be further distress to [x]. i agreed to stay and at around midnight, the police attending their home, however, i was able to explain the situation and the police left. (as per the original)   she did not assist x in going with the father, (b) it was not x’s decision as a ten year old to stay at the party, (c) the party occurred at a time the parties had agreed would be the father’s time with the children, (d) she knew the father had said he would collect x at 9.30 pm, (e) she attended the party to “calm things down” but acted in a way that deferred the decision to x and this was not a good message for x, and (f) following the party, the mother did not return x to the father’s care despite the agreement with the father for x to be in his care for another nine days.   it was not x’s decision as a ten year old to stay at the party, (c) the party occurred at a time the parties had agreed would be the father’s time with the children, (d) she knew the father had said he would collect x at 9.30 pm, (e) she attended the party to “calm things down” but acted in a way that deferred the decision to x and this was not a good message for x, and (f) following the party, the mother did not return x to the father’s care despite the agreement with the father for x to be in his care for another nine days.   the party occurred at a time the parties had agreed would be the father’s time with the children, (d) she knew the father had said he would collect x at 9.30 pm, (e) she attended the party to “calm things down” but acted in a way that deferred the decision to x and this was not a good message for x, and (f) following the party, the mother did not return x to the father’s care despite the agreement with the father for x to be in his care for another nine days.   she knew the father had said he would collect x at 9.30 pm, (e) she attended the party to “calm things down” but acted in a way that deferred the decision to x and this was not a good message for x, and (f) following the party, the mother did not return x to the father’s care despite the agreement with the father for x to be in his care for another nine days.   she attended the party to “calm things down” but acted in a way that deferred the decision to x and this was not a good message for x, and (f) following the party, the mother did not return x to the father’s care despite the agreement with the father for x to be in his care for another nine days.   following the party, the mother did not return x to the father’s care despite the agreement with the father for x to be in his care for another nine days.
early 2022: sports field incident
father: [ms howell], are you here for any particular reason? what are you here for? you’re not taking [x] or [y]. mother: you’re not supporting her in any of the activities she wants to do... father: so you’re here ... no you’re not taking [x]. it’s my day ... mother: and you are not supporting her ... it’s her decision... father: [ms howell], this is highly disruptive to the kids and to myself ... mother: your behaviour is disgusting father: i will be notifying the court of this and i will be seeking that the matter’s expedited.
the first time [x] can be heard speaking in an upset voice and moaning is at 04:19 while she was crying. the impact the incident had upon [x] can be heard in her voice throughout the recording and specifically at the following intervals, 04:19 where [x] in a sad laboured voice says, “but you won't fill out the forms”, 04:27 where [x] can be heard moaning and saying in a laboured tone “daddy, why didn't you submit the forms?”, 05:38 where in a in a sad voice [x] says, “you pick, okay, you pick”. at 5:46, where with tears in her eyes, [x] says, “who do i go home with?” 05:58 where in a very sad, drawn-out tone [x] says at 05:58, “but mum wants to take 8:31 where in a very lethargic and drawn-out voice, [x] says “bye mummy”. 09:28, lethargic voice [x] says, “who do i go home with?” 09:41, where in a very lethargic and drawn out tone, [x] says, “bye mummy”. 10:41, where in a sad voice [x] says, “why does this have to happen?” towards the end of the recording, [x], [y]and i walked to my car and we left the school. whilst we were driving on [b street, suburb g], [x] said, “i've got the worst headache” and “mummy is angry at me because i didn't go with her”. i said: “no she's not beautiful”. [x] said, “yes she is, she was shaking her head at me when i came with you daddy, i'm going to get in so much trouble from mummy”. [x] said in a laboured voice, “l don't think i can go to [sport] daddy. i've got a really bad headache...i will get in trouble from mummy if i don't go”. (as per the original)
8 may 2022: mother’s day
9 may 2022: driveway incident
please make sure the bags, lunchboxes and shoes are at the door. i do not want [x] to miss school because she doesn’t have them. you are only causing undue anxiety for everyone involved. the kids don’t expect the items to be waiting at the door, prove them wrong this time.   howell] you have not been organised. drop both kids at the house and i will sort them out, that includes getting [x] to school on time and [y] to his appointment. you have caused this by refusing to hand the children over for mother’s day weekend.
mid-2022: biting incident  howell] was asked about the incident of assault where it is alleged she bit [x in mid-2022]. [ms howell] outlined her version as was in her affidavit of 20 august 2022 and the affidavits of [mr jj] and [mr nn]. [ms howell] expressed profound remorse that the injury occurred but was adamant that it was not intentional. she described that the advo prevented her from being able to provide care for [x] and because [the nature of her work], resulted in a suspension without pay from her work (because it is an assault charge). [ms howell] explained that she informed her employment immediately and agreed to taking long service leave at work until the matter was addressed in local court, as she was ‘100% confident that it would be dismissed’. (as per the original)
mid-2022  the father knew, that if he went to a police station, they would take a statement, the father said “i did not know that” and that he “wanted to hand responsibility over”, (b) the father knew that police would need to interview x, the father conceded it was a “live possibility”, (c) it would have been terrifying for x to go to a police station and make a statement, the father said he “did not know how it would all unfold”. the father conceded that: (i) he did not think about consequences for x, (ii) he knew that if police charged mother, x would have to give evidence, (iii) giving evidence could be terrifying for x, and (iv) x could have a sense of guilt for telling him.   the father knew that police would need to interview x, the father conceded it was a “live possibility”, (c) it would have been terrifying for x to go to a police station and make a statement, the father said he “did not know how it would all unfold”. the father conceded that: (i) he did not think about consequences for x, (ii) he knew that if police charged mother, x would have to give evidence, (iii) giving evidence could be terrifying for x, and (iv) x could have a sense of guilt for telling him.   it would have been terrifying for x to go to a police station and make a statement, the father said he “did not know how it would all unfold”. the father conceded that: (i) he did not think about consequences for x, (ii) he knew that if police charged mother, x would have to give evidence, (iii) giving evidence could be terrifying for x, and (iv) x could have a sense of guilt for telling him.   he did not think about consequences for x, (ii) he knew that if police charged mother, x would have to give evidence, (iii) giving evidence could be terrifying for x, and (iv) x could have a sense of guilt for telling him.  ) he knew that if police charged mother, x would have to give evidence, (iii) giving evidence could be terrifying for x, and (iv) x could have a sense of guilt for telling him.  i) giving evidence could be terrifying for x, and (iv) x could have a sense of guilt for telling him.  ) x could have a sense of guilt for telling him.
... did not want [x] to suffer anguish as a result of giving a statement or give evidence in court. to this day, i don’t know what action was appropriate. [the mother] and my relationship had broken down and [x] had a serious bite. i did not occur to me to speak to [the mother’s] lawyer to resolve it. i thought i had to report to police.
21 june 2022: interim orders  on 24 june 2022, the mother did not inform the father that x was ill, (b) on 24 june 2022, the mother did not personally care for x when she was ill, (c) on 27 june 2022, the mother did not facilitate x spending time with the father, (d) on 28 june 2022, the mother harassed the father during a phone call. the particulars of the phone call are set out at paragraph nine of the father’s affidavit sworn 21 july 2022, which discloses an argument between the parties about the police action against the mother and the biting incident, (e) during the july 2022 school holidays, the mother spoke about the father in a critical, insulting, derogatory manner to x or in x’s presence or hearing, and (f) on 18 july 2022, the mother harassed the father by communicating about the father to the paternal grandmother because the mother could have reasonably expected that the content would have been communicated to him through his parents.   on 24 june 2022, the mother did not personally care for x when she was ill, (c) on 27 june 2022, the mother did not facilitate x spending time with the father, (d) on 28 june 2022, the mother harassed the father during a phone call. the particulars of the phone call are set out at paragraph nine of the father’s affidavit sworn 21 july 2022, which discloses an argument between the parties about the police action against the mother and the biting incident, (e) during the july 2022 school holidays, the mother spoke about the father in a critical, insulting, derogatory manner to x or in x’s presence or hearing, and (f) on 18 july 2022, the mother harassed the father by communicating about the father to the paternal grandmother because the mother could have reasonably expected that the content would have been communicated to him through his parents.   on 27 june 2022, the mother did not facilitate x spending time with the father, (d) on 28 june 2022, the mother harassed the father during a phone call. the particulars of the phone call are set out at paragraph nine of the father’s affidavit sworn 21 july 2022, which discloses an argument between the parties about the police action against the mother and the biting incident, (e) during the july 2022 school holidays, the mother spoke about the father in a critical, insulting, derogatory manner to x or in x’s presence or hearing, and (f) on 18 july 2022, the mother harassed the father by communicating about the father to the paternal grandmother because the mother could have reasonably expected that the content would have been communicated to him through his parents.   on 28 june 2022, the mother harassed the father during a phone call. the particulars of the phone call are set out at paragraph nine of the father’s affidavit sworn 21 july 2022, which discloses an argument between the parties about the police action against the mother and the biting incident, (e) during the july 2022 school holidays, the mother spoke about the father in a critical, insulting, derogatory manner to x or in x’s presence or hearing, and (f) on 18 july 2022, the mother harassed the father by communicating about the father to the paternal grandmother because the mother could have reasonably expected that the content would have been communicated to him through his parents.   during the july 2022 school holidays, the mother spoke about the father in a critical, insulting, derogatory manner to x or in x’s presence or hearing, and (f) on 18 july 2022, the mother harassed the father by communicating about the father to the paternal grandmother because the mother could have reasonably expected that the content would have been communicated to him through his parents.   on 18 july 2022, the mother harassed the father by communicating about the father to the paternal grandmother because the mother could have reasonably expected that the content would have been communicated to him through his parents.
july 2022 school holidays
late 2022: hearing at suburb ll local court
late 2022: outside unit at suburb c
at 8:10am on wednesday [in late 2022], i received a phone call from [ms howell]. at the time [x], [y] and i were walking out the front door of my unit block. i answered the phone. [ms howell] said words to the effect, “why aren't you at school [y], you have an excursion and the bus leaves at 8:15”. my car was parked on the western side of [qq street], facing north, out the front of the unit block. [x], [y] and i walked to my car. as i stood at the back of my car checking to make sure it was safe to walk to the driver's door, i heard a car engine revving loudly from my left. i looked and saw [motor vehicle 1]. i looked at the number plate, as is a habit, and saw it was [...], [ms howell’s] car. at the time i saw the number plate it was about 10m away from me and was in the process of passing a white suv which was parked on the opposite side of the road. i looked inside [motor vehicle 1] and saw [mr jj] driving and [ms howell] in the front passenger's seat. the engine was revving high and loud as it travelled faster than other vehicles generally do at time of morning outside [...] my unit. [motor vehicle 1] continued south to [rr street] where i saw it turn left. [x] and [y] were talking on the phone with [ms howell] at the time of my observations. my dash camera captured [motor vehicle 1] on [qq street, suburb c]. (as per the original)
late 2022: video call from x
february 2023: dr tt’s rooms
i am a gp practising in nsw since 2004 and have been a doctor since 1979. [ms howell] was seen with her ex husband [mr howell] and their daughter [x] [in february 2023] at 4pm with a veiw to organising a new psychologist for [x] as the last one would not continue tretment without the father’s involvement. please see letter of 5 dec 2021 from that psychologist who plainly stated in that letter that until the parents put the child’s interests first rather than their own hostilities, nothing would benefit [x] who was caught in the crossfire . and she still is. the father said that the psychologist had cancelled appointments without telling him and that he had taken [x] out of school to attend these appointments. that would have to be checked with the psychologist's office but is a good example of how the communication between all is poor. the result has been that the one independent person that [x] got along with, and who could help her navigate this uncomfortable situation, is no longer available to her to continue and she needs to find a new psychologist and start all over again. this is detrimental to [x’s] well being the aggression of the ex husband [mr howell] was audible even before he entered my consulting room. i heard a raised angry male voice in the corridor and opened the door to check on what was going on as it was a level of disturbance not appropriate to a doctor's waiting room. i had a patient with me at the time but i was concerned that the people outside were safe. things quietened down when i opened the door, and i was able to finish my consultation without disturbance. it became apparent that [mr howell] did not have a good relationship with his daughter during the consultation that followed. she turned away from him whilst sitting on mum’s knee and was reluctant to speak with him in tile room. he had taken her to the police in the past for a bite mark on her arm, alleging it was an assault by her mother. he made the child give a statement to the police. when this went to court the mother said he came to the safe room that [x] was in with a minder ([ms hh]) and tried to get her physically into the court. [ms hh] had to call for the sheriff. [mr howell] has not worked for 6 years now as a result of ptsd sustained in [his previous work]. he currently believes that he has no mental health issues, despite observations during this consultation of him clenching his fists frequently and pointing his finger at me in the air which i had to ask him to stop doing. he seemed to have no insight into his mental health and repeatedly hijacked the consultation to go back to past issues, frequently repeating the same ones. it was with difficulty that i got him back to the issue on the table currently which was organising a new psychologist for [x]. also that he should get his own mental health plan so that his sessions would be covered by his medicare and payments, rather than taking time out of [x’s] own 10 sessions. he had difficulty understanding that concept and was resistant to getting a mental health plan for himself. he also stated that one attendance of his should be sufficient for the benefit of his daughter. his behaviour to his ex wife was threatening - he told her she needed to be told what “acceptable behaviour “was. he also clearly expects the court to sort these problems out - but he is clearly lacking in insight into how he himself can improve the outcomes, particularly by contributing to the psychologists sessions regarding his daughters anxiety insecurity and low self esteem. i am concerned that he has no current mental health supervision, despite being ptsd medically unfit after his specific work [...]. i am especially concerned that he has bought guns costing $30,000 and they are in [zz facility] and he currently has access to these (info from financial disclosure statement). as a result of this i am going to lodge a risk of severe harm report to child protection regarding [x]. this equally applies to his ex wife and i think should include the other child . that is not to say he shouldn’t have access to [weapons] forever, but in the current circumstances i feel very strongly that he should not have access to any [weapons]. i look forward to hearing your reply to me report. (as per the original)
father’s engagement in children’s activities
school uniforms
y’s learning needs
father’s current circumstances
...[mr howell] is not fit to undertake employment [in his previous role]. he is also unable to engage in other forms of employment on the open labour market until the retirement age of 67 years. his significant symptomatologies would preclude him from engaging in productive work.
mother’s current circumstances
expert evidence
report dated 19 january 2023
risk
overall, there appears no evidence obtained to recommend for the total exclusion of either parent on matters of contact or parental responsibility. that said, the level of conflict between the parents in this matter remains concerningly high, and the parents’ prospective abilities to be able to bridge that gap in the immediate future is considered low. as such, it is expected that the children will continue to experience conflict between the parents moving forward and this does have capacity to cause either or both children psychological harm. therefore, the recommendations of this report will seek to reduce the opportunity for conflict between the parents as much as possible, while still taking into consideration the children’s additional and ongoing needs.
...in sum, the greatest risk of ongoing harm appears most likely to be resultant of the children’s ongoing exposure to the parents’ high level of conflict.
father’s circumstances and mental health  howell] was adamant he did not want to see another psychiatrist and was happy with his condition as managed. he denied any current attendance with a psychologist since 2020. a review of [mr howell’s] medical attendance shows irregular consultations with his gp of around 4 over the year from september 2021 to september 2022. [mr howell] appears adamant he does not need further monitoring and his presentation at this assessment does appear more settled than what was described in [dr q’s] report. however, this assessment has also suggested that much of [mr howell’s] hypervigilance and fears of persecution have persisted if not become engrained in his personality. it is recommended that [mr howell] engage in long-term therapy to explore the impact of this on his interactions particularly with his children and [ms howell], although the clinician also acknowledges that [mr howell] does not appear motivated to engage in such treatment.
mother’s circumstances and mental health  howell] noted that her brother experiences depression and was hospitalised on one occasion for an attempted overdose. she did not identify any other mental health history in her family. [ms howell] denied she had ever experienced significant mental health difficulties. she noted that she and [mr howell] had attempted marriage counselling and she went back to the same counsellor some months later for advice, but otherwise had not attended a psychologist for herself. she also noted returning to [z organisation] 2021 for around five sessions for more assistance with co-parenting issues.
capacity  howell] does not deny that the children have voiced desires for more social connections. he simply asserted in response that he believes the children ‘have friends’ and they otherwise spend plenty of time with their cousins and family, and therefore does not need to do anything further to promote this. [mr howell] appears significantly less attuned to the children’s emotional needs nor able to respond to their raised concerns, as was made evident in his transcript of the recorded conversation with [x] where he continued to press her for an explanation at a time where she was apparently struggling to express herself, much less contain her distress in the moment. this is most evident in her repeated requests for him and [y] to simply stop talking. [mr howell] is strongly recommended to take part in a tuning into kids parenting course for emotional attunement, followed by tuning into teens in the coming years as [x] ages. second, it is apparent [mr howell] also had a less than comprehensive understanding of [y’s] educational needs as compared to [ms howell]. the latter is particularly difficult to enforce as he will ultimately put effort into things he evaluates as reasonable concerns. as such, the clinician cannot recommend increasing [y’s] time with [mr howell] without accepting that this facet of [y’s] development may go unaddressed in that household. (as per the original)  .] there has been limited reports of concerns for [ms howell’s] capacity to meet the children’s needs. she appears more attuned to the children’s educational and developmental needs inclusive of their need and drive for more social connections.
attitude
both parents would assert that their own decision-making processes are reflective of a reasonable attitude to their responsibilities as parents. the clinician would review that [mr howell’s] attitudes appear to prioritise personal safety, while it could be compared that [ms howell] might be favouring development and growth. while each parent might subjectively reject the other parent’s perception that they are not equally focusing on development and safety respectively, the parents struggle to reach compromise to achieve balance between their competing priorities. as an example, [x’s] sleepover in [early] 2022 was evident that it required several adults and a police callout to convince [mr howell] to compromise on an arrangement that allowed [x] to sleepover with her friends, and it was still expected that [ms howell] would be there too.
“favouring” of y  howell] was asked about allegations that he may favour [y] over [x]. he described them as ‘rubbish’. [mr howell] was asked whether [x’s] counsellor had reached out for contact. he responded by saying he had contacted her school counsellor. he was asked again specifically about her current counsellor to which he responded that he does not feel he can trust their process. to this, the clinician pointed out that this might be difficult to determine given he has not met with them. [mr howell] declared that he was not able to attend when they first reached out and they have not done so again (though nor had he made any follow-up contact). [mr howell] offered that he was not sure whether [x] was still attending and again reiterated he was not sure the counsellor was independent.
comment: the question remains open as to whether this is yet another aspect of [mr howell’s] generalised hypervigilance, which appears is being managed via a somewhat maladaptive strategy of avoidance. (as per the original)   howell] stated that she felt that when the children were very young, it became obvious that [mr howell] had always favoured [y] over [x]. she declared that when they first separated, he even proposed splitting the children up, with him taking [y] and [ms howell] to take [x]. she described that he never missed one of [y’s sports] games but until 2021, had never taken [x] to her [sport].   cc] went on to describe that [x] had previously discussed her perception that her father appeared to focus on [y], and favour him over her. [ms cc] detailed [x] described that she wanted her father to ‘step up’ more, but to the best of her knowledge, had not yet summoned the courage to do so. (as per the original)
y’s learning needs  howell] was asked about any additional needs the children have. [mr howell] first said none, then with prompting confirmed that [y’s] reading was indeed ‘behind. no doubt’. he described that [y] was involved in a [literacy] program that involved work at school and some tasks for home that he had to do ‘from time to time’. ultimately his review of [y’s] educational needs was vague. he said he had discussions with the teacher multiple times but could not recall the last time he had checked in. instead, he declared that [y] has glasses for reading that [ms howell] will not let him take to [mr howell’s] home. (as per the original)   howell] declared that she felt it possible that [y] would later require speech pathology to assist with his language development – she described he had several ear infections as a child, and this had impaired the general development of his phenetic perception. she described that he had previously attended a speech pathologist from 2018-2019. [ms howell] expressed that she was already entirely responsible for his [medical care], social development, and homework and educational development. [ms howell] expressed that she would like [y] to have a full cognitive and learning assessment.   was asked about homework. he described that he does a lot more homework at his mum’s. when asked why, he described an online portal where he completes the maths homework, but he only has the code at mums. the clinician enquired as to whether that code is something that could easily be shared between parents so he could complete the work in both environments, to which [y] shrugged. [y] confirmed he reads in both houses.   was asked about homework. she said she usually does a little bit of homework in both homes, saying she does spelling first and maths later. [x] did not distinguish between doing certain homework in different homes.
whether due to his age, his potentially ‘favoured’ position with his father, or the fact he has so far experienced less direct involvement in conflict compared to [x] (or all of the above), [y’s] currently emotional wellbeing appears much less effected. he did not demonstrate overtly anxious features or elevated symptoms of depression. however, it was clear the greater concerns relate to [y’s] education and development as his delay in reading has been identified. [ms howell] is concerned that [y] requires more consistent engagement with his plan for bridging that delay, and [y] too reported a difference in the level and type of homework he does between his two homes. the subpoenaed material from [y’s] school indicated [y’s] reading difficulties have been identified for well over two years. the material outlines several meetings with parents and plans for addressing his reading gap at home. the clinician thus agrees that [mr howell’s] apparent minimal level of concern about [y’s] reading plan is troubling.
x’s mental health  was asked about the incident in [mid-2022] and her interview with police in [mid‑2022]. the clinician asked her to narrate what happened from the point of coming into contact with the police. [x] immediately shut down. she shook her head and hid her head in her hands and expressed that she did not want to talk about it. [x] said that she knew she had to talk to someone again (apparently referencing her need to appear in court [...]) and said she did not like it. a common strategy for identifying a child’s goals is to ask what they might do with three wishes. [x] said she only wished that ‘the thing’ had not happened. based on the context of the discussion this was noted to specifically reference the bite from her mother. still, it was evident that the involvement of the police and now ongoing requirement to address this in court again is a source of considerable distress to [x].
y’s mental health
two measures were administered to [y] as assessments of his current emotional wellbeing. his responding indicated a low probability that he is experiencing symptoms associated with an anxiety disorder and provided self-descriptors that indicated he had a secure self-confidence, and no indication of symptoms of dysphoria or depression.
children’s social development  was asked about her time with her father. [x] stated that when she is with her dad she asks if she can have sleepovers, but he says that she is too young. at this point [x] was observed to demonstrate regressive behaviours, curling her posture in, and chewing on her sleeve. [x] declared that her ‘dad doesn’t let me walk with my friends’. when asked more [x] responded with ‘i don’t know’. the most the clinician could ascertain was that this was a point of personal distress for [x], but (based on observation only), she evidenced a weariness associated with potentially getting into trouble if she said much more. (as per the original)
children’s views  opted not to put forward a clear preference at this time, but that appeared to be less driven by uncertainty or confusion about what she wanted, and more motivated about not being drawn even further into this conflict. given her being directly involved in a local court proceeding against her mother, it would also be an inopportune time to ascertain her wishes as she appeared openly resistant to her father and could potentially be motivated to try and protect her mother. [y] opted for no change, as might be expected given his reduced experience of conflict and otherwise young age, where change presents as a potentially increase in conflict. as such, the clinician can only suggest the court place minimal weight on the children’s views as expressed here, and given [x] already fears the impact her previous disclosures may have on her family ongoing, the clinician does not suggest any further weight or responsibility is placed upon her regarding this.
expert’s oral evidence   both children are expending considerable amounts of energy to minimise their exposure to parental conflict and navigate their journey between the two parents’ worlds, (b) the lack of parental co-operation is a significant contributing factor to x’s anxiety and y’s learning issues, (c) y’s time with the father is more focussed on activities, whereas x is inexorably caught in the conflict of parents. she is soaking up the conflict and is a remarkably sensitive child. the expert was concerned about the burden of this case on x, (d) a consistent approach between households is critical for y. the different approach to his learning may provide a foundation for him to actively develop strategies of avoidance. there needs to be a message that schoolwork comes before play in both homes. if the court finds that y may not get the same message from both homes, and the mother is more focussed on education, it would be in y’s best interest to spend more time with mother to support his learning. this was viewed as a significant factor, (e) school-based changeovers are recommended. when both parents are together, x is physically and psychologically overwhelmed, (f) the expert adhered to his preferred “option c.” a scenario of thursday to friday and then thursday to monday is essentially the expert’s favoured recommended proposal, (g) the effect of the father’s hypervigilance on the children’s social development may result in the children seeing and hearing modelled behaviours that life and the world are to be feared. this is especially the case with x, who is already sensitive if not scared. y is less impacted than x but the father’s hypervigilance is still conditioning him, and (h) x’s lament that she feels she cannot have friends over to the father’s home makes it possible that she will reject the father’s home as it makes her feel more scared.   the lack of parental co-operation is a significant contributing factor to x’s anxiety and y’s learning issues, (c) y’s time with the father is more focussed on activities, whereas x is inexorably caught in the conflict of parents. she is soaking up the conflict and is a remarkably sensitive child. the expert was concerned about the burden of this case on x, (d) a consistent approach between households is critical for y. the different approach to his learning may provide a foundation for him to actively develop strategies of avoidance. there needs to be a message that schoolwork comes before play in both homes. if the court finds that y may not get the same message from both homes, and the mother is more focussed on education, it would be in y’s best interest to spend more time with mother to support his learning. this was viewed as a significant factor, (e) school-based changeovers are recommended. when both parents are together, x is physically and psychologically overwhelmed, (f) the expert adhered to his preferred “option c.” a scenario of thursday to friday and then thursday to monday is essentially the expert’s favoured recommended proposal, (g) the effect of the father’s hypervigilance on the children’s social development may result in the children seeing and hearing modelled behaviours that life and the world are to be feared. this is especially the case with x, who is already sensitive if not scared. y is less impacted than x but the father’s hypervigilance is still conditioning him, and (h) x’s lament that she feels she cannot have friends over to the father’s home makes it possible that she will reject the father’s home as it makes her feel more scared.   y’s time with the father is more focussed on activities, whereas x is inexorably caught in the conflict of parents. she is soaking up the conflict and is a remarkably sensitive child. the expert was concerned about the burden of this case on x, (d) a consistent approach between households is critical for y. the different approach to his learning may provide a foundation for him to actively develop strategies of avoidance. there needs to be a message that schoolwork comes before play in both homes. if the court finds that y may not get the same message from both homes, and the mother is more focussed on education, it would be in y’s best interest to spend more time with mother to support his learning. this was viewed as a significant factor, (e) school-based changeovers are recommended. when both parents are together, x is physically and psychologically overwhelmed, (f) the expert adhered to his preferred “option c.” a scenario of thursday to friday and then thursday to monday is essentially the expert’s favoured recommended proposal, (g) the effect of the father’s hypervigilance on the children’s social development may result in the children seeing and hearing modelled behaviours that life and the world are to be feared. this is especially the case with x, who is already sensitive if not scared. y is less impacted than x but the father’s hypervigilance is still conditioning him, and (h) x’s lament that she feels she cannot have friends over to the father’s home makes it possible that she will reject the father’s home as it makes her feel more scared.   a consistent approach between households is critical for y. the different approach to his learning may provide a foundation for him to actively develop strategies of avoidance. there needs to be a message that schoolwork comes before play in both homes. if the court finds that y may not get the same message from both homes, and the mother is more focussed on education, it would be in y’s best interest to spend more time with mother to support his learning. this was viewed as a significant factor, (e) school-based changeovers are recommended. when both parents are together, x is physically and psychologically overwhelmed, (f) the expert adhered to his preferred “option c.” a scenario of thursday to friday and then thursday to monday is essentially the expert’s favoured recommended proposal, (g) the effect of the father’s hypervigilance on the children’s social development may result in the children seeing and hearing modelled behaviours that life and the world are to be feared. this is especially the case with x, who is already sensitive if not scared. y is less impacted than x but the father’s hypervigilance is still conditioning him, and (h) x’s lament that she feels she cannot have friends over to the father’s home makes it possible that she will reject the father’s home as it makes her feel more scared.   school-based changeovers are recommended. when both parents are together, x is physically and psychologically overwhelmed, (f) the expert adhered to his preferred “option c.” a scenario of thursday to friday and then thursday to monday is essentially the expert’s favoured recommended proposal, (g) the effect of the father’s hypervigilance on the children’s social development may result in the children seeing and hearing modelled behaviours that life and the world are to be feared. this is especially the case with x, who is already sensitive if not scared. y is less impacted than x but the father’s hypervigilance is still conditioning him, and (h) x’s lament that she feels she cannot have friends over to the father’s home makes it possible that she will reject the father’s home as it makes her feel more scared.   the expert adhered to his preferred “option c.” a scenario of thursday to friday and then thursday to monday is essentially the expert’s favoured recommended proposal, (g) the effect of the father’s hypervigilance on the children’s social development may result in the children seeing and hearing modelled behaviours that life and the world are to be feared. this is especially the case with x, who is already sensitive if not scared. y is less impacted than x but the father’s hypervigilance is still conditioning him, and (h) x’s lament that she feels she cannot have friends over to the father’s home makes it possible that she will reject the father’s home as it makes her feel more scared.   the effect of the father’s hypervigilance on the children’s social development may result in the children seeing and hearing modelled behaviours that life and the world are to be feared. this is especially the case with x, who is already sensitive if not scared. y is less impacted than x but the father’s hypervigilance is still conditioning him, and (h) x’s lament that she feels she cannot have friends over to the father’s home makes it possible that she will reject the father’s home as it makes her feel more scared.   x’s lament that she feels she cannot have friends over to the father’s home makes it possible that she will reject the father’s home as it makes her feel more scared.   the father’s contravention application shows a predisposition to bring matters to court when father sees an injustice, as part of “black and white thinking”, (b) the events of the sleepover for x at a friend’s home in 2022 would have been “spectacularly mortifying” for x, (c) x wants the father to “step up” more, that is, be more involved with x rather than demonstrating overt favouritism to y. it is probably likely that x feels that the father gives a disproportionate amount of attention to y than herself, (d) as x becomes an adolescent and wants to spend more time with friends, it is possible that she and the father will clash if x perceives the father’s view as absolute. she will be wary of that and will internalise that because it will be too costly for her at an internal level. as she enters adolescence, x’s capacity for independence and “voting with her feet” will coalesce. that is – wanting to spend time with friends, her father’s rigidity, not wanting an issue, avoiding a fight and then not going with her friends, and (e) when comparing a four-night per fortnight arrangement (as proposed by the mother) and a six-night arrangement (per the current regime), the expert said both come at a cost. the higher level of contact may result in x becoming resentful of time spent with the father due to her capacity to exert her own views. if the time is reduced to four nights, it may set up a system where x only has “good times” and the father is a “disney parent.” this may reinforce that the children only go to the father for good times, talk about safe things, then leave.   the events of the sleepover for x at a friend’s home in 2022 would have been “spectacularly mortifying” for x, (c) x wants the father to “step up” more, that is, be more involved with x rather than demonstrating overt favouritism to y. it is probably likely that x feels that the father gives a disproportionate amount of attention to y than herself, (d) as x becomes an adolescent and wants to spend more time with friends, it is possible that she and the father will clash if x perceives the father’s view as absolute. she will be wary of that and will internalise that because it will be too costly for her at an internal level. as she enters adolescence, x’s capacity for independence and “voting with her feet” will coalesce. that is – wanting to spend time with friends, her father’s rigidity, not wanting an issue, avoiding a fight and then not going with her friends, and (e) when comparing a four-night per fortnight arrangement (as proposed by the mother) and a six-night arrangement (per the current regime), the expert said both come at a cost. the higher level of contact may result in x becoming resentful of time spent with the father due to her capacity to exert her own views. if the time is reduced to four nights, it may set up a system where x only has “good times” and the father is a “disney parent.” this may reinforce that the children only go to the father for good times, talk about safe things, then leave.   x wants the father to “step up” more, that is, be more involved with x rather than demonstrating overt favouritism to y. it is probably likely that x feels that the father gives a disproportionate amount of attention to y than herself, (d) as x becomes an adolescent and wants to spend more time with friends, it is possible that she and the father will clash if x perceives the father’s view as absolute. she will be wary of that and will internalise that because it will be too costly for her at an internal level. as she enters adolescence, x’s capacity for independence and “voting with her feet” will coalesce. that is – wanting to spend time with friends, her father’s rigidity, not wanting an issue, avoiding a fight and then not going with her friends, and (e) when comparing a four-night per fortnight arrangement (as proposed by the mother) and a six-night arrangement (per the current regime), the expert said both come at a cost. the higher level of contact may result in x becoming resentful of time spent with the father due to her capacity to exert her own views. if the time is reduced to four nights, it may set up a system where x only has “good times” and the father is a “disney parent.” this may reinforce that the children only go to the father for good times, talk about safe things, then leave.   as x becomes an adolescent and wants to spend more time with friends, it is possible that she and the father will clash if x perceives the father’s view as absolute. she will be wary of that and will internalise that because it will be too costly for her at an internal level. as she enters adolescence, x’s capacity for independence and “voting with her feet” will coalesce. that is – wanting to spend time with friends, her father’s rigidity, not wanting an issue, avoiding a fight and then not going with her friends, and (e) when comparing a four-night per fortnight arrangement (as proposed by the mother) and a six-night arrangement (per the current regime), the expert said both come at a cost. the higher level of contact may result in x becoming resentful of time spent with the father due to her capacity to exert her own views. if the time is reduced to four nights, it may set up a system where x only has “good times” and the father is a “disney parent.” this may reinforce that the children only go to the father for good times, talk about safe things, then leave.   when comparing a four-night per fortnight arrangement (as proposed by the mother) and a six-night arrangement (per the current regime), the expert said both come at a cost. the higher level of contact may result in x becoming resentful of time spent with the father due to her capacity to exert her own views. if the time is reduced to four nights, it may set up a system where x only has “good times” and the father is a “disney parent.” this may reinforce that the children only go to the father for good times, talk about safe things, then leave.   sport may be a form of socialising for the children. a lesson as a singular pursuit could be quite divorced from a child’s social network, (b) x perceives she is not allowed to invite friends to the father’s home and this causes her to feel internal discomfort and anxiety. this was based on x’s report to the expert, (c) it is possible that x’s belief came from someone else. however, there is no objective evidence to assist the child to form a different belief, such as permitting x to bring friends home, (d) x confided in the father in mid-2022. the father’s police witness statement permits an inference that there was a serious level of reluctance on x’s part to tell the father she had been bitten, (e) x’s fear of getting into trouble from the mother in connection with the police report is an excellent example of x caught at the centre of parental conflict, (f) it is easily concluded from paragraph 168 of the father’s trial affidavit that x was under severe emotional strain in mid-2022. the cause of the emotional strain was complex. the overwhelming burden for x is about the conflict that is now being realised between her parents and the fact that she feels responsible for that, (g) the events surrounding the bite incident presented an opportunity for the father to be of comfort to x without police. it could have been a breakthrough moment for the parents to have direct communication and any number of different support mechanisms. the enormity of the impact includes how x trusts police and external people, and (h) the recordings of early 2022 and 9 may 2022 demonstrate that x was under “emotional strain”, although this is a powerful understatement.   x perceives she is not allowed to invite friends to the father’s home and this causes her to feel internal discomfort and anxiety. this was based on x’s report to the expert, (c) it is possible that x’s belief came from someone else. however, there is no objective evidence to assist the child to form a different belief, such as permitting x to bring friends home, (d) x confided in the father in mid-2022. the father’s police witness statement permits an inference that there was a serious level of reluctance on x’s part to tell the father she had been bitten, (e) x’s fear of getting into trouble from the mother in connection with the police report is an excellent example of x caught at the centre of parental conflict, (f) it is easily concluded from paragraph 168 of the father’s trial affidavit that x was under severe emotional strain in mid-2022. the cause of the emotional strain was complex. the overwhelming burden for x is about the conflict that is now being realised between her parents and the fact that she feels responsible for that, (g) the events surrounding the bite incident presented an opportunity for the father to be of comfort to x without police. it could have been a breakthrough moment for the parents to have direct communication and any number of different support mechanisms. the enormity of the impact includes how x trusts police and external people, and (h) the recordings of early 2022 and 9 may 2022 demonstrate that x was under “emotional strain”, although this is a powerful understatement.   it is possible that x’s belief came from someone else. however, there is no objective evidence to assist the child to form a different belief, such as permitting x to bring friends home, (d) x confided in the father in mid-2022. the father’s police witness statement permits an inference that there was a serious level of reluctance on x’s part to tell the father she had been bitten, (e) x’s fear of getting into trouble from the mother in connection with the police report is an excellent example of x caught at the centre of parental conflict, (f) it is easily concluded from paragraph 168 of the father’s trial affidavit that x was under severe emotional strain in mid-2022. the cause of the emotional strain was complex. the overwhelming burden for x is about the conflict that is now being realised between her parents and the fact that she feels responsible for that, (g) the events surrounding the bite incident presented an opportunity for the father to be of comfort to x without police. it could have been a breakthrough moment for the parents to have direct communication and any number of different support mechanisms. the enormity of the impact includes how x trusts police and external people, and (h) the recordings of early 2022 and 9 may 2022 demonstrate that x was under “emotional strain”, although this is a powerful understatement.   x confided in the father in mid-2022. the father’s police witness statement permits an inference that there was a serious level of reluctance on x’s part to tell the father she had been bitten, (e) x’s fear of getting into trouble from the mother in connection with the police report is an excellent example of x caught at the centre of parental conflict, (f) it is easily concluded from paragraph 168 of the father’s trial affidavit that x was under severe emotional strain in mid-2022. the cause of the emotional strain was complex. the overwhelming burden for x is about the conflict that is now being realised between her parents and the fact that she feels responsible for that, (g) the events surrounding the bite incident presented an opportunity for the father to be of comfort to x without police. it could have been a breakthrough moment for the parents to have direct communication and any number of different support mechanisms. the enormity of the impact includes how x trusts police and external people, and (h) the recordings of early 2022 and 9 may 2022 demonstrate that x was under “emotional strain”, although this is a powerful understatement.   x’s fear of getting into trouble from the mother in connection with the police report is an excellent example of x caught at the centre of parental conflict, (f) it is easily concluded from paragraph 168 of the father’s trial affidavit that x was under severe emotional strain in mid-2022. the cause of the emotional strain was complex. the overwhelming burden for x is about the conflict that is now being realised between her parents and the fact that she feels responsible for that, (g) the events surrounding the bite incident presented an opportunity for the father to be of comfort to x without police. it could have been a breakthrough moment for the parents to have direct communication and any number of different support mechanisms. the enormity of the impact includes how x trusts police and external people, and (h) the recordings of early 2022 and 9 may 2022 demonstrate that x was under “emotional strain”, although this is a powerful understatement.   it is easily concluded from paragraph 168 of the father’s trial affidavit that x was under severe emotional strain in mid-2022. the cause of the emotional strain was complex. the overwhelming burden for x is about the conflict that is now being realised between her parents and the fact that she feels responsible for that, (g) the events surrounding the bite incident presented an opportunity for the father to be of comfort to x without police. it could have been a breakthrough moment for the parents to have direct communication and any number of different support mechanisms. the enormity of the impact includes how x trusts police and external people, and (h) the recordings of early 2022 and 9 may 2022 demonstrate that x was under “emotional strain”, although this is a powerful understatement.   the events surrounding the bite incident presented an opportunity for the father to be of comfort to x without police. it could have been a breakthrough moment for the parents to have direct communication and any number of different support mechanisms. the enormity of the impact includes how x trusts police and external people, and (h) the recordings of early 2022 and 9 may 2022 demonstrate that x was under “emotional strain”, although this is a powerful understatement.   the recordings of early 2022 and 9 may 2022 demonstrate that x was under “emotional strain”, although this is a powerful understatement.
contentions
primary considerations   the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both of their parents, and (b) the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.
children’s views and the weight to be applied
the nature of the children’s relationship with each of the children’s parents and other persons
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has taken, or failed to take, the opportunity to participate in making decisions about a major long term issues in relation to the children, to spend time with the children, and to communicate with the children
the extent to which each of the children’s parents has fulfilled, or failed to fulfil, the parent’s obligations to maintain the children
the likely effect of any changes in the children’s circumstances
the practical difficulty and expense of the children spending time with and communicating with a parent, and whether that difficulty or expense will substantially affect the children’s right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a regular basis
the capacity of each of the children’s parents, and any other person, to provide for the needs of the children, including emotional and intellectual needs
the maturity, sex, lifestyle and background, including any lifestyle, culture and traditions, of the children, and of either of the children’s parents, and any other characteristics of the children that the court thinks relevant
aboriginal or torres strait island children: the children’s right to enjoy their aboriginal or torres strait islander culture, including the right to enjoy that culture with other persons who share that culture, and the likely impact that the proposed parenting order under this part will have on that right
the attitude to the children, and to the responsibilities of parenthood, demonstrated by each of the children’s parents
if a family violence order applies, or has applied, to the children or a member of the children’s family, any relevant inferences that can be drawn from the order, taking into account the nature of the order, the circumstances in which the order was made, any evidence admitted in proceedings for the order, any findings made by the court in, or in proceedings for, the order, and any other relevant matter
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least likely to lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the children
any other fact or circumstances the court considers relevant
conclusion regarding parenting
property
contentions
legal framework   in property settlement proceedings, the court may make such order as it considers appropriate:   in the case of proceedings with respect to the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them - altering the interests of the parties to the marriage in the property,
[...]   the court must not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.  .]   in considering what order (if any) should be made under this section in property settlement proceedings, the court must take into account:   the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage, or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property, whether or not that last‑mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (b) the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage, or a child of the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property, whether or not that last‑mentioned property has, since the making of the contribution, ceased to be the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, and (c) the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent, and (d) the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage, and (e) the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) so far as they are relevant, and
the judge called upon to decide proceedings of that kind is not entitled to do what has been described as 'palm tree justice'. no doubt he is given a wide discretion, but he must exercise it in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down. .] third, whether making a property settlement order is “just and equitable” is not to be answered by beginning from the assumption that one or other party has the right to have the property of the parties divided between them or has the right to an interest in marital property which is fixed by reference to the various matters (including financial and other contributions) set out in s 79(4). the power to make a property settlement order must be exercised “in accordance with legal principles, including the principles which the act itself lays down”. to conclude that making an order is “just and equitable” only because of and by reference to various matters in s 79(4), without a separate consideration of s 79(2), would be to conflate the statutory requirements and ignore the principles laid down by the act.
...if the parties’ interests in specific items of property differ or they have made differing contributions, it may be desirable to proceed upon an item by item basis in the division of property between them. in such cases, justice and equity may be best served by treating the items separately for the purpose of determining the proportions in which they are to be divided, particularly if the overall division is to be effected by the transfer or retention of interests in individual assets...
consideration
what are the assets, liabilities and financial resources of the parties or either of them?
the financial contribution made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last‑mentioned property
initial contributions  the seed capital of the suburb p unit, which was about $12,500, (b) the life insurance cover of $547,536, (c) other superannuation of $29,353, and (d) cash of $45,552.   the life insurance cover of $547,536, (c) other superannuation of $29,353, and (d) cash of $45,552.   other superannuation of $29,353, and (d) cash of $45,552.   cash of $45,552.
contributions during the relationship and since separation e husband] indicated that currently he strongly needs support. he came into town today, travelling on a train, which he said he could not do himself and does not believe he could have coped with a psychiatric examination without the support of his wife.
he found himself tearful unreasonably in public places. there was sleep disturbance and problems in relating, and further events occurred. effectively, he appears to have been in a state of breakdown at this time.
the contribution (other than a financial contribution) made directly or indirectly by or on behalf of a party to the marriage to the acquisition, conservation or improvement of any of the property of the parties to the marriage or either of them, or otherwise in relation to any of that last mentioned property
the contribution made by a party to the marriage to the welfare of the family constituted by the parties to the marriage and any children of the marriage, including any contribution made in the capacity of homemaker or parent
the effect of any proposed order upon the earning capacity of either party to the marriage
the matters referred to in subsection 75(2) of the act so far as they are relevant
should the wife be given an opportunity to retain the property?
distribution of jointly owned campervan and joint account
conclusion regarding property
costs of the independent children’s lawyer
associate: dated: 22 may 2023
dated: 22 may 2023