last updated: 31 may 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
rainger & cadis [2023] fedcfamc2f 591
orders
the court orders that:
the court directs that:
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland
the department of families fairness and housing’s involvement
section 11f report- 28 june 2021
psychological assessment – 8 april 2022
“severe deficits in thinking, reasoning skills, and adaptive behaviour skills.” [ms d] went on to say, “her ability to learn, access, identify and apply rules, knowledge and concepts is in the extremely low average... they are also necessary to provide meaningful legal instructions and fully grasp the nature and consequences of legal proceedings.”
family report – 29 january 2023
summary of court appearances   that pursuant to rule 6.11(1) of the family law rules it is requested that the attorney-general of the commonwealth of australia nominate, in writing, a person to be a case guardian for the respondent [ms cadis] and it is further requested that the case guardian be female.   in accordance with order 7 of the 20 april 2022 interim orders be varied to provide that pursuant to rule 3.15 of the federal circuit and family court of australia rules (family law) rules 2021, it is again requested that the attorney-general of the commonwealth of australia nominate, in writing a person to be a litigation guardian for the respondent mother and it is requested that consideration be granted to [ms k] or [mr l] be approached to consider that position. [5] with reference to paragraph 4 herein, in the event that the attorney-general of the commonwealth of australia is unable to appoint a litigation guardian, the independent children’s lawyer (“icl”) is requested to make special application to victoria legal aid for funding for the appointment of a litigation guardian for the respondent mother [ms cadis] in the initial sum of five thousand dollars ($5000.00) and it is requested that victoria legal aid give special consideration to this request in circumstances where the psychological report of the respondent mother prepared by [ms d], clinical psychologist, dated 8 april 2022 confirms the need for the respondent mother to have a litigation guardian and the icl shall be permitted to provide a copy of the report of [ms d] referred to in this paragraph to victoria legal aid.   that the court considers it appropriate and necessary for victoria legal aid to grant funding to [ms cadis] for a litigation guardian with particular reference given to page 22 of [ms d’s] [sic] psychological assessment of [ms cadis] dated 8 april 2022.
responses from the attorney-general department
thank you for the correspondence regarding the appointment of a litigation guardian for [ms cadis] in the matter of [rainger & cadis] mlc3515/2021. i apologise for the delay in getting back to you. i can confirm that the department has exhausted all avenues, and unfortunately we have been unable to source a litigation guardian for this matter. the following organisations have confirmed they are unable to assist with this matter, either due to resourcing or a limited scope in the services they provide: office of the public advocate (vic) victoria legal aid aed legal centre m organisation n support services citizen advocacy region o citizen advocacy as you are aware, the department is considering options to improve the appointment process but we expect that will take a few months yet to identify solutions. we have also been following the disability royal commission and the submissions by and hearings with disability advocates about challenges and opportunities for better supporting people with impaired capacity. we will arrange a follow up meeting with the courts about this issue shortly.
refusal of funding
as the role of the litigation guardian is to stand in the shoes of the litigant and provide instructions to the lawyer, there is no requirement for the litigation guardian to be a lawyer. often, the litigation guardian is a friend or family member that undertakes the role free of charge. we do not consider it reasonable to pay for a guardian. we do not consider the role of litigation guardian to be forensic. we do not consider it part of vla's responsibility to fund litigation guardian.
the court’s processes, including the legislation and rules which govern it, contemplate a process whereby the attorney-general appoints a case guardian so as to obviate the very sorts of difficulties that have occurred in this case. the difficulties encountered by the independent children’s lawyer...in having a case guardian appointed in this case in accordance with the court’s rules are deposed to in an affidavit by [the independent children’s lawyer] filed in these proceedings.
convention on the rights of persons with disabilities and the royal commission into violence, abuse, neglect and explotation of people with disability
article 12 – equal recognition before the law 1. states parties reaffirm that persons with disabilities have the right to recognition everywhere as persons before the law. 2. states parties shall recognize that persons with disabilities enjoy legal capacity on an equal basis with others in all aspects of life. 3. states parties shall take appropriate measures to provide access by persons with disabilities to the support they may require in exercising their legal capacity. 4. states parties shall ensure that all measures that relate to the exercise of legal capacity provide for appropriate and effective safeguards to prevent abuse in accordance with international human rights law. such safeguards shall ensure that measures relating to the exercise of legal capacity respect the rights, will and preferences of the person, are free of conflict of interest and undue influence, are proportional and tailored to the person’s circumstances, apply for the shortest time possible and are subject to regular review by a competent, independent and impartial authority or judicial body. the safeguards shall be proportional to the degree to which such measures affect the person’s rights and interests. 5.subject to the provisions of this article, states parties shall take all appropriate and effective measures to ensure the equal right of persons with disabilities to own or inherit property, to control their own financial affairs and to have equal access to bank loans, mortgages and other forms of financial credit, and shall ensure that persons with disabilities are not arbitrarily deprived of their property article 13-access to justice 1. states parties shall ensure effective access to justice for persons with disabilities on an equal basis with others, including through the provision of procedural and age-appropriate accommodations, in order to facilitate their effective role as direct and indirect participants, including as witnesses, in all legal proceedings, including at investigative and other preliminary stages. 2. in order to help to ensure effective access to justice for persons with disabilities, states parties shall promote appropriate training for those working in the field of administration of justice, including police and prison staff.
people with any kind of impairment, whether existing at birth or required through illness, accident or the ageing process, including cognitive impairment and physical, century, intellectual, and psychosocial disability.
conclusions and hopes for the future
associate: dated: 22 may 2023
dated: 22 may 2023
[1] see rule 3.16(5) of the federal circuit and family court rules 2021[2] see royal commission into violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation of people with disability - interim report (royal commission, october 2020) and roundtable supported decision-making and guardianship: royal commission into violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation of people with disability - summary report (royal commission, october 2022).[3]see royal commission into violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation of people with disability issues paper – promoting inclusion (royal commission, december 2020) , royal commission into violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation of people with disability - diversity, dignity, equity and best practice: a framework for supported decision-making ( royal commission, january 2023) and royal commission into violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation of people with disability - the united nations convention on the rights of persons with disabilities: an assessment of australia’s level of compliance (royal commission, october 2020).