last updated: 17 february 2022
federal circuit and family court of australia(divison 2)
peake & sackville [2021] fedcfamc2f 278
orders
on a final basis the court orders that:
1. all previous parenting orders in relation to x (“x”) born in 2016 are discharged.
parental responsibility
2. the parties have equal shared parental responsibility for x.
live with
3. x live with the mother.
spend time
4. x will spend time with the father: (a) until he commences kindergarten, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school thursday, or 5pm if thursday is a non-school day, until the commencement of school tuesday, or 5pm if tuesday is a non-school day, (b) once he commences kindergarten in each school term, every alternate weekend from the conclusion of school thursday, or 10am if thursday is a non-school day, until the commencement of school tuesday, or 10am if tuesday is a non-school day, (c) once he commences kindergarten during school holiday periods: (i) for the first half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of each school term and concluding at 5pm on the middle day of the holidays being the day that is an equal number of days from the last day of the term and the first day of the next school term and in the event there are two days which fit that description, the later of those two days (“the middle day of the holidays”), (ii) in the term 4 school holidays: in even numbered years, from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 5pm on the middle day of the holidays, in odd numbered years, from 5pm on the middle day of the holidays until the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term,   until he commences kindergarten, each alternate weekend from the conclusion of school thursday, or 5pm if thursday is a non-school day, until the commencement of school tuesday, or 5pm if tuesday is a non-school day, (b) once he commences kindergarten in each school term, every alternate weekend from the conclusion of school thursday, or 10am if thursday is a non-school day, until the commencement of school tuesday, or 10am if tuesday is a non-school day, (c) once he commences kindergarten during school holiday periods: (i) for the first half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of each school term and concluding at 5pm on the middle day of the holidays being the day that is an equal number of days from the last day of the term and the first day of the next school term and in the event there are two days which fit that description, the later of those two days (“the middle day of the holidays”), (ii) in the term 4 school holidays: in even numbered years, from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 5pm on the middle day of the holidays, in odd numbered years, from 5pm on the middle day of the holidays until the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term,   for the first half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays commencing at the conclusion of school on the last day of each school term and concluding at 5pm on the middle day of the holidays being the day that is an equal number of days from the last day of the term and the first day of the next school term and in the event there are two days which fit that description, the later of those two days (“the middle day of the holidays”), (ii) in the term 4 school holidays: in even numbered years, from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 5pm on the middle day of the holidays, in odd numbered years, from 5pm on the middle day of the holidays until the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term,
5. x spend time with each parent as follows: (a) with the mother, for the second half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays commencing at 5pm on the middle day of the holidays, (b) with the mother, in the term 4 school holidays: (i) in odd numbered years, from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 5pm on the middle day of the holidays, (ii) in even numbered years, from 5pm on the middle day of the holidays until the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term, (c) during the christmas period as follows: (i) in years ending in an even number with the father from 5pm on christmas eve to 5pm on christmas day, and then with the mother from 5pm on christmas day to 5pm on boxing day, (ii) in years ending in an odd number, with the mother from 5pm on christmas eve to 5pm on christmas day, and then with the father from 5pm christmas day to 5pm boxing day,  with the mother, for the second half of the term 1, 2 and 3 school holidays commencing at 5pm on the middle day of the holidays, (b) with the mother, in the term 4 school holidays: (i) in odd numbered years, from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 5pm on the middle day of the holidays, (ii) in even numbered years, from 5pm on the middle day of the holidays until the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term, (c) during the christmas period as follows: (i) in years ending in an even number with the father from 5pm on christmas eve to 5pm on christmas day, and then with the mother from 5pm on christmas day to 5pm on boxing day, (ii) in years ending in an odd number, with the mother from 5pm on christmas eve to 5pm on christmas day, and then with the father from 5pm christmas day to 5pm boxing day,  in odd numbered years, from the conclusion of school on the last day of the school term until 5pm on the middle day of the holidays, (ii) in even numbered years, from 5pm on the middle day of the holidays until the commencement of school on the first day of the next school term,   in years ending in an even number with the father from 5pm on christmas eve to 5pm on christmas day, and then with the mother from 5pm on christmas day to 5pm on boxing day, (ii) in years ending in an odd number, with the mother from 5pm on christmas eve to 5pm on christmas day, and then with the father from 5pm christmas day to 5pm boxing day,  on mother’s day from 10am to 5pm, (e) if not otherwise spending time with x and in the event x’s birthday falls on a school day, from 3pm on x’s birthday to the commencement of school the following day, and otherwise from 1pm to 5pm, (f) from 5pm on the mother's birthday to the commencement of school the following day if the mother’s birthday falls on a school day, and otherwise from 10am to 5pm, (g) from 5pm on the father's birthday to the commencement of school the following day if the father’s birthday falls on a school day, and otherwise from 10am to 5pm, (h) on father's day from 10am to 5pm, (i) with the father, on the easter long weekend from 5pm easter saturday to 5pm easter sunday in even numbered years and from 5pm easter sunday to 5pm easter monday in odd numbered years, (j) with the mother, on the easter long weekend from 5pm easter saturday to 5pm easter sunday in odd numbered years and from 5pm easter sunday to 5pm easter monday in even numbered years, (k) with the father on anzac day from 10am to 5pm, (l) with the father, from the conclusion of school, or 5pm if a school day the day before australia day until the commencement of school the day after australia day, if either of these days falls on a school day or otherwise from 5pm the day before australia day until 10am the day after australia day: (m) on halloween, with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 5pm if a non-school day) on the day before halloween until the commencement of school the day after halloween or 10am if not a school day, (n) on thanksgiving, with the mother from the conclusion of school (or 5pm if a school day) the day before thanksgiving until the commencement of school the day after thanksgiving or 10am if not a school day, (o) at other times as agreed between the parties in writing.
6. changeover is to occur as follows: (a) at x’s school on days when he is attending school, (b) otherwise, changeover is to occur at the mother’s residence unless agreed between the parties in writing.   at x’s school on days when he is attending school, (b) otherwise, changeover is to occur at the mother’s residence unless agreed between the parties in writing.
communication
7. each party communicate with x as agreed between the parties in writing or at all reasonable times as requested by x.
8. each party is permitted to liaise directly with the x’s school principals or teachers to obtain any information about x’s progress at school or information about events such as swimming carnivals, sports days, grandparent days, parent/teacher interviews and other educational activities or to arrange for the sending out of newsletters, school photos and academic report cards, and any other documents provided to parents directly from the school with these orders authorising the release of such information, to each of the parties.
9. each parent is entitled to attend all events and extra-curricular activities involving x including but not limited to: (a) sporting fixtures and events, (b) extra-curricular activities that allow for parental attendance or participation, and (c) school functions and events that allow for parental attendance or participation and the parents will ensure that the paternal grandparents are aware of all school events involving grandparents, and (d) in the event that the party who is responsible for taking x to an event becomes unable to do so, they will contact the other parent and invite them to attend with x.medical  sporting fixtures and events, (b) extra-curricular activities that allow for parental attendance or participation, and (c) school functions and events that allow for parental attendance or participation and the parents will ensure that the paternal grandparents are aware of all school events involving grandparents, and (d) in the event that the party who is responsible for taking x to an event becomes unable to do so, they will contact the other parent and invite them to attend with x.
10. each party is permitted to liaise directly with any doctor, hospital or other medical practitioners treating x to obtain information about the physical and/or mental health of x and the progress of any treatment he may be receiving, and these orders authorise the release of such information, including copies of any medical reports, to each of the parties.
11. the parties must notify the other parent as soon as practicable of any serious medical problems or illnesses suffered by x whilst in their care, including but not limited to, details of any treating medical practitioners and any medication prescribed for x.
12. each parent is at liberty to schedule medical appointments and therapy sessions for x during the time x lives/spends time with the other parent provided, (a) the parent scheduling the appointment provides the other parent with no less than 14 days written notice of the date, time and purpose of the appointment and/or session, (b) each parent be at liberty to attend any appointment and/or therapy session for x, (c) each parent is permitted to contact any organisation on which x has attended or is scheduled to attend treatment/therapy prior to or following the appointment/therapy session to obtain information or reports concerning x’s treatment/therapy session at his/her own cost, (d) in the event that the party who is responsible for taking x to an appointment and/or therapy session becomes unable to do so before rescheduling the appointment, they will contact the other parent and invite them to attend with x.  the parent scheduling the appointment provides the other parent with no less than 14 days written notice of the date, time and purpose of the appointment and/or session, (b) each parent be at liberty to attend any appointment and/or therapy session for x, (c) each parent is permitted to contact any organisation on which x has attended or is scheduled to attend treatment/therapy prior to or following the appointment/therapy session to obtain information or reports concerning x’s treatment/therapy session at his/her own cost, (d) in the event that the party who is responsible for taking x to an appointment and/or therapy session becomes unable to do so before rescheduling the appointment, they will contact the other parent and invite them to attend with x.
13. the parents are to follow all recommendations given by each of x’s medical practitioners and other health care professionals, including x’s attendance upon other recommended health care practitioners.
14. the parties as x's representatives in respect of the ndia shall jointly make all decisions, including in respect of: (a) the preparation and lodgement of x's ndis plan, (b) provision to the ndia planner with any of x’s medical or educational reports, (c) provision to the ndia planner or the ndia with any other information required to progress x's ndis plan.  the preparation and lodgement of x's ndis plan, (b) provision to the ndia planner with any of x’s medical or educational reports, (c) provision to the ndia planner or the ndia with any other information required to progress x's ndis plan.
15. each parent is at liberty to provide to any organisation upon which x attends for the purposes of medical treatment or education with a copy of these orders.passports and travel
16. each parent shall be permitted to take x out of australia in accordance with section 65y(2)(b) of the family law act 1975 (cth), and the following orders shall apply: (a) that the parent travelling with x (“the travelling parent”) will give to the other party at least six (6) weeks written notice of the proposed travel, (b) that the proposed travel does not unreasonably interfere with x’s schooling or therapies, (c) that the proposed travel does not unreasonably prevent the other parent from spending time with x pursuant to these orders unless that party consents in writing, (d) that the travelling parent provide the other party no later than four (4) weeks prior to the proposed travel with an itinerary which will include the date x will be leaving australia and the date x will be returning, flight details including carrier and flight number, telephone number and address of where x will be staying during their absence from australia, and contact details for x at each place they will be staying during their absence from australia, (e) that the travelling parent provide the other party with a copy of x’s return ticket to australia no later than four (4) weeks prior to the proposed travel, (f) that the travelling parent facilitate communication between the other parent and x on no less than two (2) occasions per week while x is away, (g) if the mother is the travelling parent, then the father shall provide to the mother x’s passport/s not less than seven (7) days prior to any notified overseas travel and the mother return x’s passport/s to be held by the father after the conclusion of travel as soon as practicable after return but no more than seven (7) days after x has returned to australia.  that the parent travelling with x (“the travelling parent”) will give to the other party at least six (6) weeks written notice of the proposed travel, (b) that the proposed travel does not unreasonably interfere with x’s schooling or therapies, (c) that the proposed travel does not unreasonably prevent the other parent from spending time with x pursuant to these orders unless that party consents in writing, (d) that the travelling parent provide the other party no later than four (4) weeks prior to the proposed travel with an itinerary which will include the date x will be leaving australia and the date x will be returning, flight details including carrier and flight number, telephone number and address of where x will be staying during their absence from australia, and contact details for x at each place they will be staying during their absence from australia, (e) that the travelling parent provide the other party with a copy of x’s return ticket to australia no later than four (4) weeks prior to the proposed travel, (f) that the travelling parent facilitate communication between the other parent and x on no less than two (2) occasions per week while x is away, (g) if the mother is the travelling parent, then the father shall provide to the mother x’s passport/s not less than seven (7) days prior to any notified overseas travel and the mother return x’s passport/s to be held by the father after the conclusion of travel as soon as practicable after return but no more than seven (7) days after x has returned to australia.
17. the parties do all things and sign all documents necessary to obtain a united states passport and an australian passport for x and the father will hold those passports. specific issue orders
18. each party will keep the other informed of their current residential address, telephone contact numbers, email address and the telephone contact numbers and email addresses for x (should he have them) and will notify the other party of any change to those details within 48 hours of such change occurring.
19. each party is to preference the use of the my family wizard app for their communications about x.
20. the mother is to ensure that she continues to attend upon her general medical practitioner to monitor her mental health and that she is adherent to any medication or therapy as recommended by any of her treating practitioners.
21. within 42 days both parties will participate in an intake session for family therapy and will follow the recommendations of mr b, or any other therapist to which he refers them, for the purposes of family therapy.
22. the parties are restrained from: (a) denigrating the other parent or members of the other parent's family to x or within his hearing, and the parties are to use their best efforts to ensure that no other person denigrates the other parent or members of the other parent’s family to x or within his hearing, (b) smoking in the presence of x or within any residence or vehicle in which x is present while x is in their care and from allowing or facilitating any third party to smoke in the presence of x or in any residence or vehicle in which x is present, and (c) drinking alcohol beyond having a 0.05 bac while x is in their care or within 12 hours prior to having x in their care.  denigrating the other parent or members of the other parent's family to x or within his hearing, and the parties are to use their best efforts to ensure that no other person denigrates the other parent or members of the other parent’s family to x or within his hearing, (b) smoking in the presence of x or within any residence or vehicle in which x is present while x is in their care and from allowing or facilitating any third party to smoke in the presence of x or in any residence or vehicle in which x is present, and (c) drinking alcohol beyond having a 0.05 bac while x is in their care or within 12 hours prior to having x in their care.
23. in the event that either party refuses or neglects to sign any document or do anything required pursuant to these orders, a registrar of the court be appointed pursuant to
s 106a of the family law act 1975 (cth) to sign such documents and do such acts on behalf of either party.
24. the independent children’s lawyer be discharged.
the court notes that:  "act" means the family law act 1975 (cth), (ii) "child" means x born in 2016, (iii) "father" means mr peake, (iv) "mother" means ms sackville, (v) "ndia" means the national disability insurance agency, (vi) "ndis" means the national disability insurance scheme, (vii) "parents" and "parties" means the mother and the father, and (viii) "school" means whatsoever day care, preschool, primary or secondary school in which x is enrolled. (ix) “treaters” means any person who provides x with medical treatment or therapy
note: the form of the order is subject to the entry in the court’s records. note: this copy of the court’s reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors (r 10.14(b) federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13 federal circuit and family court of australia (family law) rules 2021 (cth). section 121 of the family law act 1975 (cth) makes it an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to publish proceedings that identify persons, associated persons, or witnesses involved in family law proceedings. it is noted that publication of this judgment by this court under a pseudonym peake & sackville has been approved pursuant to s 121(9)(g) of the family law act 1975 (cth).
reasons for judgment
introduction
1 these are parenting proceedings concerning x born in 2016, now five years old.
agreed orders
2 at the final hearing, the parties agreed to the following orders: (a) that x live with the mother, (b) that the parties share parental responsibility for x, (c) spend time with arrangements for x during school holidays, and (d) some specific issue orders.[1]  that x live with the mother, (b) that the parties share parental responsibility for x, (c) spend time with arrangements for x during school holidays, and (d) some specific issue orders.[1]
issues in dispute
3 the issues requiring judicial determination are: (a) parental communication, while the parents agree to share parental responsibility, they cannot agree on what should happen in the event of an impasse, (b) the time that the father spends with x, specifically should x spend five nights or six nights each fortnight with the father, and when should his time transition to one block of time (x currently spends five nights each fortnight with the father, who now seeks to spend six nights broken into two blocks of four nights and two nights), (c) whether the court should make some specific orders about the scheduling of medical appointments for x and the parties engagement with the national disability insurance scheme (“ndis”), (d) what role the paternal grandparents should play in x’s medical and allied health treatment, (e) what provisions should be made for christmas day and other days of significance to the mother, (f) whether the parties should apply for an american passport for x and who should hold any and all of the passports, and (g) whether i should make an order about mental health care plans and treatment for the parties.  parental communication, while the parents agree to share parental responsibility, they cannot agree on what should happen in the event of an impasse, (b) the time that the father spends with x, specifically should x spend five nights or six nights each fortnight with the father, and when should his time transition to one block of time (x currently spends five nights each fortnight with the father, who now seeks to spend six nights broken into two blocks of four nights and two nights), (c) whether the court should make some specific orders about the scheduling of medical appointments for x and the parties engagement with the national disability insurance scheme (“ndis”), (d) what role the paternal grandparents should play in x’s medical and allied health treatment, (e) what provisions should be made for christmas day and other days of significance to the mother, (f) whether the parties should apply for an american passport for x and who should hold any and all of the passports, and (g) whether i should make an order about mental health care plans and treatment for the parties.
evidence
4 both parties were legally represented at the hearing.
5 the court was assisted by an independent children’s lawyer (“icl”).
6 the father relied upon: (a) case outline document filed 17 june 2021, (b) affidavit of mr peake filed 24 may 2021, (c) affidavit of mr c filed 24 may 2021, (d) affidavit of ms sackville filed 24 may 2021, and (e) single expert report of dr d 1 july 2020 (“single expert report”).  case outline document filed 17 june 2021, (b) affidavit of mr peake filed 24 may 2021, (c) affidavit of mr c filed 24 may 2021, (d) affidavit of ms sackville filed 24 may 2021, and (e) single expert report of dr d 1 july 2020 (“single expert report”).
7 the mother relied upon: (a) case outline document filed 17 june 2021, (b) affidavit of ms sackville filed 24 may 2021, and (c) notice of risk filed 11 february 2019, (d) child dispute conference memorandum dated 20 february 2019, and (e) the single expert report.   case outline document filed 17 june 2021, (b) affidavit of ms sackville filed 24 may 2021, and (c) notice of risk filed 11 february 2019, (d) child dispute conference memorandum dated 20 february 2019, and (e) the single expert report.
8 the icl relied upon, (a) case outline document filed 18 june 2021, and (b) the single expert report.   case outline document filed 18 june 2021, and (b) the single expert report.
9 the following documents were tendered: (a) exhibits annexed to the affidavit of mr peake filed 24 may 2021 (exhibit one), (b) bundle of emails from the respondent mother regarding x’s enrolment in e school (exhibit two), (c) the respondent mother’s aid memoire (exhibit three), (d) the applicant father’s schedule of tenders (exhibit four), (e) the joint tender bundle (exhibit five), (f) the single expert report (exhibit six) (g) the icl’s minute of non-contentious orders (exhibit seven), (h) minute of order sought by the respondent mother (exhibit eight), (i) the icl’s updated minute of order (exhibit nine), and (j) the applicant father’s proposed minute of order (exhibit ten).   exhibits annexed to the affidavit of mr peake filed 24 may 2021 (exhibit one), (b) bundle of emails from the respondent mother regarding x’s enrolment in e school (exhibit two), (c) the respondent mother’s aid memoire (exhibit three), (d) the applicant father’s schedule of tenders (exhibit four), (e) the joint tender bundle (exhibit five), (f) the single expert report (exhibit six) (g) the icl’s minute of non-contentious orders (exhibit seven), (h) minute of order sought by the respondent mother (exhibit eight), (i) the icl’s updated minute of order (exhibit nine), and (j) the applicant father’s proposed minute of order (exhibit ten).
10 the only witnesses called were the parties and the paternal grandparents.
11 dr d (“single expert”) gave evidence and was cross-examined.
12 the father gave direct and honest answers. i find him to be a credible witness.
13 the mother was a friendly witness who answered the questions asked of her. her evidence needs to be understood in the context of her medical condition. she has been diagnosed with, and receives treatment for, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (“adhd”) and post traumatic stress disorder (“ptsd”).
14 the mother gave evidence that she is an “undiagnosed autistic”. she referred to this when she was shown evidence which suggested that she had provided an inaccurate answer. sometimes she was unsure about the order of past events and asked to be referred to affidavit material because she needed “prompts to jog memories and/or access memories”.
15 both paternal grandparents said that they did not trust the mother because she occasionally spoke untruths, or at least gave a version of events that did not reflect their reality. this was tested under cross-examination. for example it was put to the mother that changeovers did not present any difficulties for x. the mother challenged this, saying that for the majority of changeovers she has had to coax x to leave her. she said:
he clings to me, says he does not want to go, i have had to cuddle him, soothe him, there is a lot of disruptiveness ...on some occasions i have had to forcibly get him in the car, he was grabbing my clothes, arms, and it was one of the most distressing things that i have ever had to do.
16 counsel for the father pointed out that this issue had not been raised in her affidavit or the single expert report. the mother alleged that she had told her lawyers and the single expert but they chose not to refer to the issue.
17 x has behavioural difficulties and i accept that on some occasions his behaviour might be challenging. however, i cannot accept difficulties at changeover to be a regular occurrence. i am not suggesting that the mother deliberately mislead the court. rather, this demonstrates an occasion where the mother’s experience may not have accorded with the reality of other witnesses. therefore, i have treated the mother’s version of certain events with caution, and on some matters i will prefer the evidence of other witnesses.
18 the paternal grandmother gave evidence in an honest and frank manner. she admitted that she could not trust the mother. while she is clearly aligned with the father’s case, it is clear that she loves x very much, supports him enormously, and is an important person in his life. i found her to be a truthful witness.
19 the paternal grandfather gave his evidence in a clear and forthright manner. while he is clearly aligned to the father’s case, there is no doubt that he works hard to get the best outcomes for his family, and will continue to play an active and hands on role in supporting the father and x. he is the patriarch of the family, and the father and mother had previously turned to him for support. he was observed to be a man of honesty, intelligence and integrity. however, it is possible that the mother finds him, and her dealings with him, to be intimidating. nonetheless i found him to be a credible witness.
20 the single expert was a credible witness who provided great insight into the family dynamics and x’s needs. i accept the evidence she gave.
relevant facts
21 the mother is ms sackville who was born in 1985 and is aged 35 years old. the mother was born in the united states of america (“usa”).
22 the father is mr peake who was born in 1986 and is aged 34 years.
23 in 2007 the parties commenced an online relationship.
24 in 2008 the mother relocated from the usa to sydney.
25 in 2009 the parties married in sydney.
26 in 2016 the child of the relationship x was born.
27 in december 2017 the parties separated.
28 in december 2018 the father commenced parenting proceedings.
29 on 1 july 2020 the single expert prepared the single expert report.
30 on 9 august 2021 the matter proceeded to final hearing.
31 as at the date of the final hearing: (a) the mother is living in rental accommodation with x. she does not work and is available to care for him on a full time basis. (b) the mother is in a long distance relationship which started in 2017, and at the time of the hearing she indicated she had no plan live with her partner in the immediate future. (c) the mother was born in the usa but has no desire to relocate there. she seeks an order permitting her to travel to the usa with x and this is not contested by the father. (d) the father is living with his parents and his sister ms f in his parent’s suburb g home. (e) the father has recently commenced a new role at employer h. he works five days per week in 8.5 hour shifts. he is currently working from home on a full time basis, and anticipates working from the office each friday once the covid – 19 restrictions ease. the father has not re-partnered.   the mother is living in rental accommodation with x. she does not work and is available to care for him on a full time basis. (b) the mother is in a long distance relationship which started in 2017, and at the time of the hearing she indicated she had no plan live with her partner in the immediate future. (c) the mother was born in the usa but has no desire to relocate there. she seeks an order permitting her to travel to the usa with x and this is not contested by the father. (d) the father is living with his parents and his sister ms f in his parent’s suburb g home. (e) the father has recently commenced a new role at employer h. he works five days per week in 8.5 hour shifts. he is currently working from home on a full time basis, and anticipates working from the office each friday once the covid – 19 restrictions ease. the father has not re-partnered.
proposals
32 the mother proposes that: (a) the parties have equal shared parental responsibility, (b) x live with her and spend time with the father 5 nights per fortnight, and (c) she be able to travel overseas with x in order to visit her family in the usa.   the parties have equal shared parental responsibility, (b) x live with her and spend time with the father 5 nights per fortnight, and (c) she be able to travel overseas with x in order to visit her family in the usa.
33 the father proposes that: (a) the parties have shared parental responsibility but where a party does not respond to a matter raised by the other party a decision can be made by the moving party, (b) x spend six nights a fortnight with the father in two separate blocks, transitioning to one block of six nights a fortnight each alternate week at the commencement of term three 2022, and (c) that the father jointly plan and make decisions about the management of x’s health through the ndis.   the parties have shared parental responsibility but where a party does not respond to a matter raised by the other party a decision can be made by the moving party, (b) x spend six nights a fortnight with the father in two separate blocks, transitioning to one block of six nights a fortnight each alternate week at the commencement of term three 2022, and (c) that the father jointly plan and make decisions about the management of x’s health through the ndis.
34 the icl proposes that: (a) the parties have equal shared parental responsibility, (b) x live with the mother, (c) x spend five nights with the father in two blocks every fortnight until the conclusion of the 2022 term two school holidays, transitioning in term three of 2022 to five nights in one block every second week commencing on the first thursday of that term, and (d) each parent is at liberty to schedule medical appointments and therapy sessions for x during the time x lives/spends time with the other parent.  the parties have equal shared parental responsibility, (b) x live with the mother, (c) x spend five nights with the father in two blocks every fortnight until the conclusion of the 2022 term two school holidays, transitioning in term three of 2022 to five nights in one block every second week commencing on the first thursday of that term, and (d) each parent is at liberty to schedule medical appointments and therapy sessions for x during the time x lives/spends time with the other parent.
the child x
35 it is important to capture information about x who is the subject of these proceedings.
36 x is five years old.
37 on 13 december 2017 the parents received a report that x had global development delay (“gdd”).
38 on 29 june 2018 dr j provided a report noting x to have both gdd, traits of autism, and adhd. the report further noted that x has a rare medical condition of which the long term impacts are unknown.
39 on 31 may 2019 x’s ndis funding was approved.
40 on 7 april 2021 a report on x’s special needs was prepared by the child development unit of the children’s hospital in suburb k. it diagnosed x with: (a) diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (dsm 5) autism spectrum disorder (“asd”) requiring very substantial support (level 3 for restricted repetitive behaviour and level 2 for reciprocal social communication), (b) dsm 5 attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder combined presentation, (c) dsm 5 intellectual disability mild, (d) language impairment in association with asd, (e) speech sound disorder, (f) a medical condition, and (g) murmur radiating down the right side of the neck (awaiting cardiology review).   diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (dsm 5) autism spectrum disorder (“asd”) requiring very substantial support (level 3 for restricted repetitive behaviour and level 2 for reciprocal social communication), (b) dsm 5 attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder combined presentation, (c) dsm 5 intellectual disability mild, (d) language impairment in association with asd, (e) speech sound disorder, (f) a medical condition, and (g) murmur radiating down the right side of the neck (awaiting cardiology review).
41 the mother describes x as a smart, intelligent and creative child with an amazing, vibrant and affectionate personality.
42 the father describes x as a happy, affectionate, energetic and playful child.
43 the single expert did not interview x due to his young age and language difficulties. she did however observe him with the parties. the single expert made the following observations as to x: (a) x attempted to make conversation in his interactions with his father, (b) x was quite loud and noisy in his play, and at times his laughing response was exaggerated, (c) x enjoyed playing with a truck and beating a drum in the play room, and (d) x was quite distractible and moved from activity to activity[2]  x attempted to make conversation in his interactions with his father, (b) x was quite loud and noisy in his play, and at times his laughing response was exaggerated, (c) x enjoyed playing with a truck and beating a drum in the play room, and (d) x was quite distractible and moved from activity to activity[2]
44 the single expert said:
x (aged 4 years and 4 months) presented as a busy and active child...x was observed to be restless and disruptive with a number of behaviours which would suggest developmental delays. at the time of the interviews x was not yet toilet trained.[3]
45 the single expert concluded the single expert report with the following recommendations: (a) that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility. if they cannot achieve this on their own, they might benefit from engaging with a therapist preferably who specialises in family law with the view of working on issues such as sharing parental responsibility, reflecting on their parenting behaviour, testing their views on each other and exploring avenues for addressing tensions in their parenting relationship. (b) that x lives with his mother. (c) that x spend five days per fortnight with his father. it is recommended that school holidays and special occasions be shared equally between the parties. (d) that the parties continue to use a communication book or a communication app such as my family wizard to share information about x. (e) that as far as practicable, both parties attend x’s appointments with his paediatrician, australian hearing, occupational and speech therapists, day care and, in the future, school and that they jointly implement any recommendations made by those practitioners. (f) that there be no denigration of significant others or any discussions pertaining to the adult dispute with x. (g) that ms sackville continue to monitor her mental health with her general practitioner and be adherent with any medication or therapy that is suggested. (h) that mr peake attend a circle of security course.   that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility. if they cannot achieve this on their own, they might benefit from engaging with a therapist preferably who specialises in family law with the view of working on issues such as sharing parental responsibility, reflecting on their parenting behaviour, testing their views on each other and exploring avenues for addressing tensions in their parenting relationship. (b) that x lives with his mother. (c) that x spend five days per fortnight with his father. it is recommended that school holidays and special occasions be shared equally between the parties. (d) that the parties continue to use a communication book or a communication app such as my family wizard to share information about x. (e) that as far as practicable, both parties attend x’s appointments with his paediatrician, australian hearing, occupational and speech therapists, day care and, in the future, school and that they jointly implement any recommendations made by those practitioners. (f) that there be no denigration of significant others or any discussions pertaining to the adult dispute with x. (g) that ms sackville continue to monitor her mental health with her general practitioner and be adherent with any medication or therapy that is suggested. (h) that mr peake attend a circle of security course.
the law
46 the principles governing the court’s determination on competing parenting applications are set out in part vii of the family law act 1975 (cth) (“the act”).
47 pursuant to s 60ca of the act the court must consider what is in the best interests of the child when making a parenting order. in hardie v capris [2010] famca 1046 at [48] murphy j succinctly clarified:
“best interests” is not the application of a theoretical construct but, rather, the practical application of a number of considerations relevant to the individual needs, desires, health and aspirations of the particular child or children of this particular parenting relationship.
48 as discussed by the full court in moose & moose [2008] famcafc 108 at [66], the role of the judicial officer in making orders which are in the best interests of the child is to determine the best interest having regard to “the matters set out in section 60cc(2) and (3) guided in consideration of the provisions by the objects set out in section 60b(1) and the principles underpinning it contained in section 60b(2)”.
49 in the leading authority of mazorski & albright [2007] famca 520 at [3] (“mazorski & albright”), justice brown refers to the primary considerations for determining the child’s best interests, as set out in s 60cc(2) of the act, as the “twin pillars” of the act outlining that:
the first pillar is the importance to children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents, the second is the need to protect children from physical and psychological harm.
50 the act indicates that these considerations are to be considered as having particular importance. they are described as the primary considerations. as stated in s 60b, the best interests of the child are met by ensuring they have the benefit of both their parents having a meaningful involvement in their lives to the maximum extent, consistent with their best interests, and protecting them from physical or psychological harm, and from being subjected to or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence.
51 the court must balance the benefit to x of having a meaningful relationship with the father with the primary consideration of protecting him from physical or psychological harm, from being subjected or exposed to abuse, neglect or family violence. fortunately for x, no significant risk issues were raised at the final hearing.
52 the concept of “a meaningful relationship” has been discussed in many authorities, most significantly in the decision of justice brown in mazorski & albright. those authorities establish that “a meaningful relationship” is a qualitative concept. the relationship is not measured simply by the amount of time the child is spending with each parent, but the quality of the relationship that exists between the child and parent.
53 there are 13 additional considerations for determining what is in a child’s best interest, which are set out in s 60cc(3). i will address those which are relevant later in this judgment.
54 if the child is subject to an equal shared parental responsibility order, the amount of time to be spent by the non-resident parent, if reasonably practical, must be considered. where there is a dispute between equal time and substantial and significant time, the court is required to consider whether an order for equal time or substantial and significant time is in the best interests of the child and is reasonably practicable.[4]
55 for a parenting order to involve a child spending substantial and significant time with a parent, s 65daa(3) requires that it must at least provide for the children to spend time with the parent both on days falling on weekends and holidays, and on days falling outside those times. the order must also allow the parent to be involved in the children’s daily routine, on occasions and events that are of particular significance to the children, and for the children to be involved in occasions and events that are of special significance to the parent.
56 there is a distinct pathway which applies to parenting matters where an equal shared parental responsibility order is made, and this pathway will be followed.[5]
the evidence on the section 60cc considerations
57 there is no doubt that both parents enjoy a meaningful relationship with x and will continue to do so. x will benefit from the continuation of this.
58 the single expert also confirmed that x will benefit from the visible and active presence of his parents in his life.[6]
59 i note that the mother made allegations of sexual violence against the father at the date of separation. these allegations were denied by the father, there are no family violence orders, and neither party contended that x is at risk of harm in the care of either parent.
60 the mother also alleged in her affidavit some past concerns about the father’s capacity to care for himself and x when he was living alone. these concerns about neglect appeared to arise in the context of a mental health episode experienced by the father post separation. the mother did not press this issue as a current risk.
61 the mother was open and honest about her mental health issues. she was diagnosed with adhd in 1999 and has been under the consistent treatment of medical practitioners to manage her condition since. in 2018 she was also diagnosed with ptsd and sees a psychiatrist every six months for a review. there was no suggestion that the mother’s health posed any risk to x, unless of course she fails to attend on her treating practitioners or stops following their recommendations.
62 this is not a case where either party asserts that x is at risk of harm in the care of either party, nor that there is a need to protect x from physical or psychological harm that he might be exposed to in either household.
63 section 60cc(3) of the act sets out additional consideration for determining what is in a child’s best interest, and reference is now made to those relevant to these proceedings.
64 the mother has been the primary caregiver for x throughout his life. she has had a significant role in the care of x to date. she gave sensitive evidence about x’s special needs and how she ensures they are met.
65 the father has also been actively engaged in x’s life and it is clear that he enjoys a positive relationship with x. this was supported by the single expert’s observations.[7]
66 the paternal grandparents have enjoyed a close and loving relationship with x since he was born. x has, and continues to spend significant time with them. they provide excellent support to the father in caring for x.
67 both parties have had an active involvement in making decisions about the major long-term issues regarding x. the mother does not work and has always been the primary carer for x. she has consistently been involved in all decisions concerning his long-term welfare and development.
68 the father works full time. in his previous role he was subject to restrictions about the use of his telephone during business hours. as a result, he says he asked his parents to assist from time to time by making phone calls or appointments on his behalf for x. at the time of the hearing he had commenced a new position of employment and was confident that he would not be so reliant on his parents for this in the future.
69 the parents’ ability to communicate with each other regarding major long-term decisions is an issue of contention. the father alleges that the mother has made unilateral decisions regarding x. one such issue arose during the hearing. the parties had given evidence that x was being assessed and considered for admission to the special needs class for kindergarten aged students at e public school commencing in 2022. the father, when he gave evidence, indicated that he had missed a call from the department of education that day, and suspected that they were ringing to confirm that a place had been made available for x.
70 when the mother gave evidence the following day she confirmed that not only was x offered a place but that she had accepted it. paperwork had been sent to the mother the day before with instructions that she should complete and return it as soon as possible. the support class placement documentation was sent at 10:33am, and the mother returned the paperwork to the school one hour later.
71 while the father was copied into her response, the mother acknowledged that she had not communicated with him prior to accepting the offer. there was no suggestion that in doing so, the mother took steps that where inconsistent or contrary to the father’s wishes. rather the incident highlighted the father’s assertion that at times the mother can act compulsively, and in doing so fails to allow him to participate in making decisions about major long-term issues for x.
72 the father also expressed concern that the mother has historically been slow in engaging x with services.
73 the father has paid, and continues to pay child support in accordance with a child support assessment. he currently pays the mother $36 per fortnight.
74 there was also an issue of contention as to the payment of services not covered by ndis payments. the paternal grandparents allege that they paid for fitkidz before it was covered by ndis. they indicate that they will continue to provide a financial safety net for x’s treatments and therapies should this be necessary. there is no reason to question their ongoing commitment to supporting x financially or otherwise.
75 the mother will continue to be x’s primary carer and in all likelihood, his primary attachment figure. a significant issue in this case is the extent to which extended time with the father is in x’s best interests. the father seeks to increase his time with x to a six day block. he proposes that he continue to split this block over a two week period until the commencement of term three in 2022. the mother argues that a five day block period is in x’s best interests. she would like to move to one five day block in every fortnight as soon as possible.
76 there is a dispute between the parties as to x’s adjustment between the two households. the mother gives evidence that more frequent moves between households is unsettling and disruptive for x. she gave evidence that on his return from the father’s household x is often tired, unsettled and can display difficult behaviours. the father and the paternal grandparents did not report a similar experience.
77 the single expert found that for it to work well for x, a climate of consistency and understanding of his needs is required. at the time of writing the single expert report, she found that the parties were not entirely at that point. she recommended that x live with his mother, and spend substantial time with his father until the parties could demonstrate that they can implement mature and child focussed co-parenting arrangements.[8]
78 the single expert observed that for pre-school children, spending time weekly with each parent is developmentally important. however moving between houses requires a readjustment, and it is destabilising for a child to leave a home every week and then come back for a day. she felt a 5 day block is a natural progression for x because there was a benefit of fewer transitions. she observed that this was important for children on the autism spectrum because routine is important.
79 perhaps then the largest contention on the likely impact of changes in x’s circumstances arise from the single expert’s evidence on how best to phase in changes for x.
80 she recommended that the changes should not coincide with x’s school commencement saying “any changes need to be metered out rather than an avalanche of change as that could be confusing and bamboozling for him”. she cautioned that any change needed to be introduced sensitively and carefully.
81 she further recommended a transition to five nights with the father over a two week period, then moving to five nights in one block.
82 the parents live about 15 kilometres (a 20 minute drive) from each other. they have agreed that changeovers will ultimately take place before or after school. because the mother does not work, the father agrees to collect and return x to her home when he is not attending school.
83 there appears to be no practical difficulty or expense for x in spending time with the father.
84 it is not unusual for a court to be asked to make communication orders, particularly for video communication between a parent and child at set times. the parties gave evidence on this issue. x exhibits behavioural difficulties. he still has difficulty with verbal communications, speaking only a few words. the mother expressed concern about committing to an order that requires x to have communication with his father at a set time for these reasons.
85 the mother does not work and is available to care for x on a full time basis. she gave very thorough evidence about the steps she has taken since x’s birth to meet his physical, emotional and intellectual needs.
86 the father raised two concerns about the mother’s capacity to provide for x’s needs. he says that she doesn’t drive, and because she is reliant on public transport can be prone to running late or not meeting appointments made for x. he is also worried about the impact this might have in the future when for example, x is enrolled in organised sport and needs to be driven to sporting fields.
87 the mother did not accept that this has been a problem to date or that it will be an issue into the future. initially the father was pressing for x to be in his care each friday night/saturday. when this was explored he said he was hoping that it would allow him to assist with transportation, and to attend x’s sports and extracurricular activities. the mother reasonably requested she also have the opportunity to spend a weekend with x but expressed no hesitation in the father attending events or assisting with transportation.
88 the father’s second concern arises from what he alleges is a pattern in the mother’s diligence in taking x to his appointments. he alleged that the mother had missed facilitating 11 out of 27 speech therapy appointments, delayed making x’s ndis application in 2018 and cancelled paediatric appointments which may have led to a delay in x getting access to appropriate therapies.
89 the single expert emphasised the need for x to receive as much early intervention as possible, and for the parents to work together to ensure that he does receive the support he needs. she was of the view that the parents had some work to do before they were co-parenting effectively and recommended that they participate in family therapy to assist them in overcoming their mutual lack of trust.
90 the father argued that if he had more time with x he would take more responsibility for ensuring x’s attendance at appointments. he has not been able to make this commitment in the past due to his work commitments which required him to be working on a full-time basis during set day time hours, without access to a mobile telephone. as a result he relied upon his parents to assist him with his parenting responsibilities. at the time of the hearing the father had commenced a new job where he is required to answer help-desk calls from home, five days each week, 8.5 hours each day. however, he says that he will have more availability and potentially flexibility to assist in x’s care in the future.
91 the paternal grandparents have been of great assistance to the father. they facilitated x’s attendance at fitkidz, a homebased therapy scheduled for days when he was in the father’s care. the paternal grandfather has a background as a “senior executive” and believed that he could continue to assist the parties in accessing services for x. in the past he has, with the father’s authority, made enquiries and appointments on the father’s behalf.
92 while the paternal grandparents have the capacity to meet the emotional and intellectual needs of x, and seek to continue to play an active role, there was little trust between them and the mother. their involvement has led to difficulties as observed by the single expert who said that while the grandparents were “coming from a concerned, well intentioned and caring space...it is always problematic when grandparents are seen to be overriding the role of parents”.[9] she concluded that the impact of this on the mother would most likely have been to have “raised her defensiveness and left her feeling marginalised and disempowered”.[10]
93 the single expert was of the view that moving forward the parties needed to find a way to respect each other and improve their communication. she outlined that:
when a child has special needs, the efficacy of the child transitioning between two households is highly reliant on the parents being collaborative rather than competitive and operating from the same information, consistent intervention and similar behaviour management strategies. this cannot happen in a vacuum of the parties working together and both being involved in sessions with treating professionals or at the very least receiving summaries of those sessions. therapy intervention which involves only one parent making the decisions or the parties not being able to agree on treating therapists and therefore suggesting multiple therapists is therefore not recommended. there is strong risk if this occurs that x will quickly come to understand that there is no consistency between the two homes and that will leave him open to behaving manipulatively and playing one parent against the other. it is also likely to leave the parties persisting with disparate perceptions of x’s developmental delay and therefore operating from different baselines in their expectations of his abilities which increases the conflict between them.[11]
94 the mother is an american citizen and seeks the inclusion of some culturally important days with x such as thanksgiving and halloween. she would also like to obtain united states citizenship and an american passport for x.
95 the mother has committed herself to taking care of x on a full-time basis and ensuring that his medical needs are met. the father has also been involved in x’s life as much as he can, given his work commitments.
96 the mother also showed a responsible attitude to parenthood and encouraging the father’s relationship with x. for example under cross-examination she conceded that x tells her sometimes that he misses his dad. she said she reassures him that his dad loves him and he will see him soon. she also was open to introducing x to video communications with the father when he is not in the father’s care.
97 it was the court’s observation that the parties’ recent written communications were friendly, informative and generally appropriate. under cross-examination their approach and attitude to each other was displayed and observed to be respectful and appropriate. however issues for these parents seem to arise when they fail to consult or involve each other on an issue.
98 the schooling enrolment issue that arose during the hearing was an example of a situation where their parental communication completely failed. the parents have struggled with their communications in the past and this has led to mistrust. family therapy was ordered but issue arose with the location of the therapist. as the single expert recommended, they need to engage in family therapy to improve their communication and build up trust.
parental responsibility
99 pursuant to s 65dac of the act, an order for equal shared parental responsibility requires the parents to make together, and jointly, decisions about major long-term issues affecting the children.
100 the parties have agreed to orders for equal shared parental responsibility.
101 as a consequence s 65daa must be applied.
102 i am satisfied that any orders made allowing the father to spend time with x either 5 days or 6 days each fortnight are reasonably practicable and in x’s best interests. the orders proposed by all parties are consistent with s 65daa(2) as they allow the father to spend substantial and significant time with x on weekends, days on holidays, days during the week, and events special to the parent and to the child. further, the orders enable the father to be involved in the child’s daily routine and therefore accords with the s 65daa(2) definition of substantial and significant time. the time is considered substantial and significant regardless of whether the father spends five days or six days of time with x.
conclusions
the default position on parental responsibility & communications
103 the father seeks an order that in the event there is no engagement by either of the parties in the decision-making process, there is a way forward with the decision-making ability being allocated to the moving party on the issue.
104 the father submits that such a mechanism will encourage the parties to engage in the decision-making process. he gives a number of examples where the mother has failed to engage with him on an issue. equally, the mother gives a number of examples of issues where the father has not been prepared to engage either. the school enrolment issue that unfolded during the trial highlighted the mother’s lack of insight into what “equal shared parental responsibility” means in practice. she was asked to reflect on this by counsel for the father and she said: “i told you my reasons, i stand by them”.
105 whilst i understand the father’s reasons for seeking the parental responsibility order he does, i am not convinced that the order will address the issue. it might act to cause the mother to feel pressured by the requests of the paternal family. it might also lead to occasions where the parents argue over whether there has been genuine engagement. alternatively, with the range of complex matters that arise from parenting x, it might be difficult for the parties to agree on what is a “day to day” decision as opposed to the long-term decisions that fall under the definition of parental responsibility. ultimately conflict over such matters distracts the parties from focussing on making good joint decisions about x’s ongoing care.
106 i note that the parties are yet to complete an intake for family therapy and, with the icl’s support, i will order that this is completed within 42 days.
107 included in the hundreds of pages of exhibits and tenders were entries by the parties in a “communication book”. the communication book is maintained by the mother and the father’s household in detail. i am concerned that its completion involves excessive recordkeeping that might be unnecessary once x moves to spending time with the parents in two blocks each fortnight.
108 the paternal grandparents were critical of the accuracy of matters recorded and thought it did not lead to more active engagement on matters. the mother was enthusiastic about her use of the my family wizard app although the father was less positive. given the need for the parties to improve their parental communications, i will make an order that they preference the use of the my family wizard app for their communications about x.
specific orders about attending events, medical appointments and engagement with the national disability insurance scheme
109 i have made orders largely in line with the icl’s proposed orders which were agreed by the parties. they provide mechanisms to allow the parties to attend x’s appointments and extra-curricular activities.
110 as the cancellation and/or rescheduling of some of x’s appointments has been an issue for the parties, an order will be made requiring the party who is responsible for taking x to an event to contact the other parent and invite them to attend with x in the event that they become unable to do so.
spend time orders
111 the mother, father and icl all took slightly different positions on x’s transition to block time.
112 the father seeks an order that x spends 6 nights each fortnight with him. he proposes that it be broken across two blocks until term three in 2022 (thursday – monday in week one and then wednesday – friday in week two).
113 the mother proposes that x spends five nights each fortnight with the father. she proposes that it be taken as a block each alternate week from thursday until tuesday.
114 the icl proposes that x spend five nights each fortnight with the father and that it be broken across two blocks until term three in 2022, from which it will as a block each alternate week from thursday until tuesday.
115 the single expert gave important evidence as outlined above. her evidence was influenced by two issues: x’s capacity to move to a longer period with each parent, and the preference of avoiding too much change as x commences school.
116 there was agreement by all witnesses that x will most likely settle once he moves to a consistent and stable arrangement with a longer block of time in each household. it will give him stability between the two households, whether he is with the father for 5 nights or 6 nights.
117 there was little evidence to guide a decision about whether x, given his medical conditions, will need more time to transition into a block period with the father. it is clear that he has what counsel for the father described as “the entire family dynamic available at the father’s home”. x has a close and loving relationship with his father, aunt and grandparents. they have all been engaged in his treatment for several years now. they do not report challenging behaviour when x is with them and that could well be, as counsel for the father acknowledged, because his care is shared across three adults in the home.
118 the single expert agreed that x could trial five days consecutively now, which led the mother to propose that it begin immediately. the icl preferred a more cautious approach, and i am equally concerned about the impact on x of changing his arrangements mid-way through the school year. if he were to commence a five night arrangement now, he would have four months to settle into it before the school year commences. in arriving at this conclusion i am influenced by the mother proposing it, and the father supporting it, as she knows x the best.
119 i have no doubt that the father and the paternal family will continue to engage with x and his activities that take place during times when he is in the mother’s care. for example, now that changeovers are not taking place on a saturday, the father may still attend x’s swimming lessons and see him there. if he commences soccer next year, the father may arrange to take him to some games or attend his training.
120 i am confident that these parents will embrace their co-parenting of x as he grows. the parents were supportive of facilitating communication between x and the other parent, when he is in their care. for this reason, i do not see the need to make a formal order for contact when x is in the care of one parent.
121 i also have to consider whether the father’s time with x should increase to a block of six nights into the future. i am not prepared to make this order. x has been diagnosed with autism and exhibits challenging behaviours. the single expert remarked, the focus should not be on the quantity of time but the quality of it. x has complex needs, requires consistency and stability. therefore a cautious approach is warranted. for now i think that is more likely achieved by a longer block period of nine nights with his mother.
what provision should be made for christmas day and other days of significance to the mother?
122 the parties were in agreement about how x will spend his time during school holidays and on most special occasions.
123 i have included provision for x to spend thanksgiving and halloween with the mother as these are days of significance to her.
124 there was a small issue over the timing of christmas day changeovers. i have made orders consistent with the icl’s, and the father’s minute so that changeovers will take place at 5pm, as this does not interfere with lunch arrangements.
international travel
125 the parties both agree to an order permitting them to travel internationally with x. for this purpose they will apply for an australian passport.
126 each party sought an order that they hold the passport.
127 the mother holds dual citizenship with the united states of america. on one occasion shortly after separation she said she was considering returning to the usa with x. she has taken no steps to do so, and gave convincing evidence that she now considers australia their home. there are no flight risk concerns except that she has residency status in the united states. for this reason, i will make an order that the father holds x’s australian passport.
128 the mother also seeks an order that the father do all acts and things to sign documents that will allow x to obtain united states citizenship, a united states passport and a social security number. there was no evidence led about the obtaining of united states citizenship and a social security number apart from that it could be useful for x in the future. i see no reason why the parties cannot obtain a united states passport for x, provided that it too is held by the father.
whether an order should be made requiring the mother to attend upon her psychiatrist and gp to monitor her mental health.
129 the mother was frank about her mental health and treatment plan. she has to see her gp in order to obtain medication, and has no history of self-medicating or ceasing her medication without medical advice. on that basis i will make an order that she continues to attend upon her gp to monitor her mental health and that she adheres to any medication or therapy as recommended by any of her treaters. i do not see the necessity to make the more specific order sought by the father.
130 i thank the legal representatives and the parties for their assistance and the way they conducted themselves through the trial. x has complex needs but is blessed to have a group of adults in his life who support him, love him and are all prepared to rise above their own interpersonal issues and put the needs for x’s care, development and support above their own.
131 i wish x the very best for the future and thank you all for taking the time to ensure that the orders made by this court best support him and your relationships with him.
associate: dated: 1 november 2021
[1]the agreed orders are contained in exhibit 7 and referred to as ‘the icl’s non-contentious orders’. they will be incorporated into the final orders that are made with a notation reflecting that they are made by consent.[2]single expert report dated 1 july 2020, paragraph 115.[3]single expert report dated 1 july 2020, paragraph 113.[4]beckham & desprez [2015] famcafc 247; scvg & kld [2014] famcafc 42.[5]mrr & gr [2010] hca 4.[6]single expert report dated 1 july 2020, paragraph 120.[7]single expert report dated 1 july 2020, paragraph 124.[8]single expert report dated 1 july 2020, paragraphs 151, 166.[9]single expert report dated 1 july 2020, paragraph 139.[10]single expert report dated 1 july 2020, paragraph 139.[11]single expert report dated 1 july 2020, paragraph 140.