last updated: 7 february 2024
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
woodrow & woodrow [2023] fedcfamc2f 608
orders
the court orders that:  75% thereof to the wife (noting that the wife has received $20,000 of this amount by way of part property settlement pursuant to orders dated 19 april 2023), and (b) 25% thereof to the husband.   25% thereof to the husband.   firstly, to pay all costs, commissions and expenses of the sale, (b) secondly, to discharge the loan secured by mortgage payable to australian and new zealand banking group limited (anz), (c) thirdly, the sum of $60,000 to leslie family law, solicitors for the wife, to be held in trust to discharge capital gains tax arising from the sale, to be calculated in accordance with order 8 herein, and (d) the balance then remaining be divided: (i) 75% thereof to the wife, (ii) 25% thereof to the husband.   secondly, to discharge the loan secured by mortgage payable to australian and new zealand banking group limited (anz), (c) thirdly, the sum of $60,000 to leslie family law, solicitors for the wife, to be held in trust to discharge capital gains tax arising from the sale, to be calculated in accordance with order 8 herein, and (d) the balance then remaining be divided: (i) 75% thereof to the wife, (ii) 25% thereof to the husband.   thirdly, the sum of $60,000 to leslie family law, solicitors for the wife, to be held in trust to discharge capital gains tax arising from the sale, to be calculated in accordance with order 8 herein, and (d) the balance then remaining be divided: (i) 75% thereof to the wife, (ii) 25% thereof to the husband.   the balance then remaining be divided: (i) 75% thereof to the wife, (ii) 25% thereof to the husband.   75% thereof to the wife, (ii) 25% thereof to the husband.  ) 25% thereof to the husband.   all rental income generated by the suburb e property shall be applied to the loan secured by mortgage over the suburb e property, and to give effect to this order all rental income shall be paid to the wife, and (b) the parties shall share equally in payment of all outgoings associated with the suburb e property.   the parties shall share equally in payment of all outgoings associated with the suburb e property.   the wife shall nominate the listing agent and conveyancer and shall by this order be authorised to engage the listing agent and conveyancer on behalf of both parties, (b) the sale price shall be as recommended by the selling agent, (c) the mode of sale shall otherwise be as recommended by the selling agent, (d) both parties shall comply with and follow all directions of the selling agent.   the sale price shall be as recommended by the selling agent, (c) the mode of sale shall otherwise be as recommended by the selling agent, (d) both parties shall comply with and follow all directions of the selling agent.   the mode of sale shall otherwise be as recommended by the selling agent, (d) both parties shall comply with and follow all directions of the selling agent.   both parties shall comply with and follow all directions of the selling agent.   forthwith provide copies of their relevant tax return and notice of assessment to leslie family law, (b) leslie family law thereafter is authorised to make payment from funds held in accordance with order 4(c) to the australian taxation office on behalf of each party, and (c) any balance remaining or shortfall in the leslie family law trust account shall thereafter be divided between and or paid by the parties in the proportions in accordance with order 4(d)   leslie family law thereafter is authorised to make payment from funds held in accordance with order 4(c) to the australian taxation office on behalf of each party, and (c) any balance remaining or shortfall in the leslie family law trust account shall thereafter be divided between and or paid by the parties in the proportions in accordance with order 4(d)   any balance remaining or shortfall in the leslie family law trust account shall thereafter be divided between and or paid by the parties in the proportions in accordance with order 4(d)   'the superannuation fund' is the woodrow super fund, (b) the parties are the members, (c) 'the trustee' is woodrow pty ltd of woodrow super fund of which the parties are directors and shareholders (d) “the fund accountants” are f pty ltd (e) the wife forthwith request the fund accountants to estimate (in writing) the capital gains tax payable by the superannuation fund on the sale of g street, suburb h (suburb h cgt) (f) “the wife’s cgt amount” shall be one half (50%) of the suburb h cgt.   the parties are the members, (c) 'the trustee' is woodrow pty ltd of woodrow super fund of which the parties are directors and shareholders (d) “the fund accountants” are f pty ltd (e) the wife forthwith request the fund accountants to estimate (in writing) the capital gains tax payable by the superannuation fund on the sale of g street, suburb h (suburb h cgt) (f) “the wife’s cgt amount” shall be one half (50%) of the suburb h cgt.   'the trustee' is woodrow pty ltd of woodrow super fund of which the parties are directors and shareholders (d) “the fund accountants” are f pty ltd (e) the wife forthwith request the fund accountants to estimate (in writing) the capital gains tax payable by the superannuation fund on the sale of g street, suburb h (suburb h cgt) (f) “the wife’s cgt amount” shall be one half (50%) of the suburb h cgt.   “the fund accountants” are f pty ltd (e) the wife forthwith request the fund accountants to estimate (in writing) the capital gains tax payable by the superannuation fund on the sale of g street, suburb h (suburb h cgt) (f) “the wife’s cgt amount” shall be one half (50%) of the suburb h cgt.   the wife forthwith request the fund accountants to estimate (in writing) the capital gains tax payable by the superannuation fund on the sale of g street, suburb h (suburb h cgt) (f) “the wife’s cgt amount” shall be one half (50%) of the suburb h cgt.   “the wife’s cgt amount” shall be one half (50%) of the suburb h cgt.   the husband is entitled to be paid the specified percentage of each splittable payment out of the wife's interest in the superannuation fund, and (b) the wife's entitlement and the entitlement of such other person to whom a splittable payment may be made out of the wife's interest in the superannuation fund is correspondingly reduced.   the wife's entitlement and the entitlement of such other person to whom a splittable payment may be made out of the wife's interest in the superannuation fund is correspondingly reduced.   the wife do all such acts and things and sign all such documents as may be necessary to transfer or roll over her superannuation entitlements in the superannuation fund into the wife's nominated superannuation fund, (b) the wife do all acts and sign all such documents to: (i) resign from any office held by her in the trustee, and (ii) transfer to the husband any shares she may hold in the trustee, (c) the wife shall cease to be a member of the superannuation fund, and (d) the husband personally and in his capacity as the director of the trustee shall thereafter indemnify the wife and secure the wife's release from any liability with respect to the superannuation fund.   the wife do all acts and sign all such documents to: (i) resign from any office held by her in the trustee, and (ii) transfer to the husband any shares she may hold in the trustee, (c) the wife shall cease to be a member of the superannuation fund, and (d) the husband personally and in his capacity as the director of the trustee shall thereafter indemnify the wife and secure the wife's release from any liability with respect to the superannuation fund.   resign from any office held by her in the trustee, and (ii) transfer to the husband any shares she may hold in the trustee,  ) transfer to the husband any shares she may hold in the trustee,   the wife shall cease to be a member of the superannuation fund, and (d) the husband personally and in his capacity as the director of the trustee shall thereafter indemnify the wife and secure the wife's release from any liability with respect to the superannuation fund.   the husband personally and in his capacity as the director of the trustee shall thereafter indemnify the wife and secure the wife's release from any liability with respect to the superannuation fund.   if practicable to do so, a judicial registrar of this honourable court be and is hereby authorised to execute documents on his behalf, or (b) if a legal practitioner is required to secure compliance with the orders, ms j of t lawyers or her agent be engaged to execute such document or instrument or do all such things as may be necessary to give effect to these orders.   if a legal practitioner is required to secure compliance with the orders, ms j of t lawyers or her agent be engaged to execute such document or instrument or do all such things as may be necessary to give effect to these orders.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property (including chooses in action) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner thereof, (c) each party forego any claims he or she may have to any superannuation or related benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (e) any joint tenancy is hereby expressly severed, and (f) any joint bank account be divided equally between the parties.   insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner thereof, (c) each party forego any claims he or she may have to any superannuation or related benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (e) any joint tenancy is hereby expressly severed, and (f) any joint bank account be divided equally between the parties.   each party forego any claims he or she may have to any superannuation or related benefits belonging to or earned by the other, (d) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (e) any joint tenancy is hereby expressly severed, and (f) any joint bank account be divided equally between the parties.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders, (e) any joint tenancy is hereby expressly severed, and (f) any joint bank account be divided equally between the parties.   any joint tenancy is hereby expressly severed, and (f) any joint bank account be divided equally between the parties.   any joint bank account be divided equally between the parties.
reasons for judgment
judge champion:
introduction
the matter proceeded on an undefended basis
on 30 january 2023, the respondent husband telephoned our office to advise of his position in these proceedings. the respondent husband repeated that the matter was quite “simple” and that everything should be divided equally. he should [sic.] could not afford to continue payments for our client’s care. at the date of affirming this affidavit, the respondent husband has not filed any responding material outlining his position. [as written]
when the court may proceed on an undefended basis ] [...] having regard to the circumstances in which the initial proceedings took place in the absence of mr allesch (the appellant), it is worth emphasising that the principle just described does not require that the decision-maker actually hear (or receive the submissions of) the party potentially liable to be adversely affected. sometimes, through stubbornness, confusion, misunderstanding, fear or other emotions, a party may not take advantage of the opportunity to be heard, although such opportunity is provided. affording the opportunity is all that the law and principle require. [39] decision-makers, including the courts, cannot generally force people to protect their own rights, to adduce evidence or other materials, to present submissions or to act rationally in their own best interests. this consideration may be especially relevant in relation to the family court where emotions, often engendered by the highly personal issues involved, can sometimes cloud rational thought. [40] nor are courts obliged to delay proceedings indefinitely because one party, although proved to be on notice of the proceedings, refuses or fails to appear in person or to be represented by a lawyer or some other individual permitted to speak for them who can explain the need for an adjournment. the rights of other parties are commonly involved. in the family court, the rights of non-parties (especially children) may be affected. additionally (as this court has itself accepted), the rights of the public in the efficient discharge by courts of their functions must be weighed against unreasonable delay in concluding litigation. [footnotes omitted]
the application
statutory framework
justice and equity
the 4-step approach
first, the court should make findings as to the identity and value of the property, liabilities and financial resources of the parties at the date of the hearing. second, the court should identify and assess the contributions of the parties within the meaning of s 79(4)(a), (b) and (c) and determine the contribution based entitlements of the parties expressed as a percentage of the net value of the property of the parties. third, the court should identify and assess the relevant matters referred to in s 79(4)(d), (e), (f) and (g), (the other factors) including, because of s 79(4)(e), the matters referred to in s 75(2) so far as they are relevant and determine the adjustment (if any) that should be made to the contribution based entitlements of the parties established at step two. fourth, the court should consider the effect of those findings and determination and resolve what order is just and equitable in all the circumstances of the case:
step 1: property interests
step 2: contributions
the outset of the relationship
during the relationship  $10,000 for the purchase of an animal by the wife, (b) $80,000 for renovations at the suburb c property, (c) $30,000 for an outstanding loan payment on motor vehicle 3 solely in the wife’s name, (d) $16,000 for motor vehicle 4 solely in the husband’s name, (e) $140,000 for the repayment of the anz loan, (f) $85,000 toward the purchase of an investment property in suburb e (suburb e property), and (g) $50,000 for renovations to the suburb e property   $80,000 for renovations at the suburb c property, (c) $30,000 for an outstanding loan payment on motor vehicle 3 solely in the wife’s name, (d) $16,000 for motor vehicle 4 solely in the husband’s name, (e) $140,000 for the repayment of the anz loan, (f) $85,000 toward the purchase of an investment property in suburb e (suburb e property), and (g) $50,000 for renovations to the suburb e property   $30,000 for an outstanding loan payment on motor vehicle 3 solely in the wife’s name, (d) $16,000 for motor vehicle 4 solely in the husband’s name, (e) $140,000 for the repayment of the anz loan, (f) $85,000 toward the purchase of an investment property in suburb e (suburb e property), and (g) $50,000 for renovations to the suburb e property   $16,000 for motor vehicle 4 solely in the husband’s name, (e) $140,000 for the repayment of the anz loan, (f) $85,000 toward the purchase of an investment property in suburb e (suburb e property), and (g) $50,000 for renovations to the suburb e property   $140,000 for the repayment of the anz loan, (f) $85,000 toward the purchase of an investment property in suburb e (suburb e property), and (g) $50,000 for renovations to the suburb e property   $85,000 toward the purchase of an investment property in suburb e (suburb e property), and (g) $50,000 for renovations to the suburb e property   $50,000 for renovations to the suburb e property
events following separation
conclusion as to contributions
those same principles can be expressed as saying that the requirements of the section are met by approaching the assessment of contributions holistically and by analysing the nature, form, characteristics and origin of the property currently comprising that to which s 79 applies, and, in turn, analysing the nature, form and extent of the contributions (of all types) contemplated by s 79). that task is also undertaken by reference to the nature and form of the particular marriage partnership manifested by the particular circumstances of this particular marriage. is it, for example, a relationship, as deane j put it in mallett at clr 640– 1, alr 222, fam lr 473 “...where the parties have adopted the attitude that their marriage constituted a practical union of both lives and property...” or is it, for example, a union where parties lived very separate domestic and financial lives?
the initial contribution
the wife’s inheritance
step 3: section 79(4)(d), (e), (f) and (g) factors
parties’ earning capacity
the husband’s non-disclosure and the his premature appropriation of marital assets for his own benefit – s. 75(2)(o) 6] under well established guidelines [authorities omitted] property settlement orders may make more generous provision for one party if it is inferred the other party improperly failed to fully disclose his or her financial affairs. however, when a trial court infers a party’s failure to disclose, it is worthy of consideration whether the failure relates to assets or income, because the receipt of undisclosed income over a period of time, without more, does not necessarily permit an inference to be drawn that the money is stashed away and available at will to the recalcitrant party. just because an inference may be drawn does not mean it always must or should be drawn. [emphasis added]
superannuation
legal principles
the following matters may well be relevant: the relationship between years of fund membership and cohabitation, actual contributions made by the fund member at the commencement of the cohabitation (if applicable), at separation and at the date of hearing, preserved and non-preserved resignation entitlements at those times, and any factors peculiar to the fund or to the spouse’s present and/or future entitlements under the fund.
the facts of this case
conclusions
mechanics as to the orders
associate: dated: 25 may 2023
dated: 25 may 2023