last updated: 31 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
potter & rubra [2023] fedcfamc2f 620
orders
by way of final order, the court orders:  advise the mother in writing of the decision intended to be made, (b) seek the mother’s written response in relation thereto within seven (7) days, (c) consider, by reference to the best interests of the child, any such response prior to making any such decision, and (d) advise the mother in writing as soon as reasonably practicable of his ultimate decision.   seek the mother’s written response in relation thereto within seven (7) days, (c) consider, by reference to the best interests of the child, any such response prior to making any such decision, and (d) advise the mother in writing as soon as reasonably practicable of his ultimate decision.   consider, by reference to the best interests of the child, any such response prior to making any such decision, and (d) advise the mother in writing as soon as reasonably practicable of his ultimate decision.   advise the mother in writing as soon as reasonably practicable of his ultimate decision.   from 2 september 2023, each alternate saturday from 9:00am until 4.00pm, (b) from 6 september 2023, the mother shall be at liberty to telephone the child each wednesday between 6:00pm and 6:30pm, (c) from 28 october 2023, each alternate saturday and sunday from 9:00am until 4.00pm, (d) from 9 december 2023, each alternate weekend from 9:00am saturday until 4:00pm sunday, (e) commencing at the start of the 2024 school semester, from after school friday until 4:00pm sunday and each alternate weekend thereafter, (f) commencing april 2024, the child shall spend time with the mother for the first half of the school holidays in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years and during such school holiday periods the regular alternate weekend time shall be suspended, (g) that the christmas/january school holiday period shall be split such that the child shall spend time with the mother for the first, third and fifth week of those school holidays and the child shall spend time with the father shall on the second, fourth and sixth week of those school holidays.   from 6 september 2023, the mother shall be at liberty to telephone the child each wednesday between 6:00pm and 6:30pm, (c) from 28 october 2023, each alternate saturday and sunday from 9:00am until 4.00pm, (d) from 9 december 2023, each alternate weekend from 9:00am saturday until 4:00pm sunday, (e) commencing at the start of the 2024 school semester, from after school friday until 4:00pm sunday and each alternate weekend thereafter, (f) commencing april 2024, the child shall spend time with the mother for the first half of the school holidays in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years and during such school holiday periods the regular alternate weekend time shall be suspended, (g) that the christmas/january school holiday period shall be split such that the child shall spend time with the mother for the first, third and fifth week of those school holidays and the child shall spend time with the father shall on the second, fourth and sixth week of those school holidays.   from 28 october 2023, each alternate saturday and sunday from 9:00am until 4.00pm, (d) from 9 december 2023, each alternate weekend from 9:00am saturday until 4:00pm sunday, (e) commencing at the start of the 2024 school semester, from after school friday until 4:00pm sunday and each alternate weekend thereafter, (f) commencing april 2024, the child shall spend time with the mother for the first half of the school holidays in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years and during such school holiday periods the regular alternate weekend time shall be suspended, (g) that the christmas/january school holiday period shall be split such that the child shall spend time with the mother for the first, third and fifth week of those school holidays and the child shall spend time with the father shall on the second, fourth and sixth week of those school holidays.   from 9 december 2023, each alternate weekend from 9:00am saturday until 4:00pm sunday, (e) commencing at the start of the 2024 school semester, from after school friday until 4:00pm sunday and each alternate weekend thereafter, (f) commencing april 2024, the child shall spend time with the mother for the first half of the school holidays in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years and during such school holiday periods the regular alternate weekend time shall be suspended, (g) that the christmas/january school holiday period shall be split such that the child shall spend time with the mother for the first, third and fifth week of those school holidays and the child shall spend time with the father shall on the second, fourth and sixth week of those school holidays.   commencing at the start of the 2024 school semester, from after school friday until 4:00pm sunday and each alternate weekend thereafter, (f) commencing april 2024, the child shall spend time with the mother for the first half of the school holidays in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years and during such school holiday periods the regular alternate weekend time shall be suspended, (g) that the christmas/january school holiday period shall be split such that the child shall spend time with the mother for the first, third and fifth week of those school holidays and the child shall spend time with the father shall on the second, fourth and sixth week of those school holidays.   commencing april 2024, the child shall spend time with the mother for the first half of the school holidays in even numbered years and the second half in odd numbered years and during such school holiday periods the regular alternate weekend time shall be suspended, (g) that the christmas/january school holiday period shall be split such that the child shall spend time with the mother for the first, third and fifth week of those school holidays and the child shall spend time with the father shall on the second, fourth and sixth week of those school holidays.   that the christmas/january school holiday period shall be split such that the child shall spend time with the mother for the first, third and fifth week of those school holidays and the child shall spend time with the father shall on the second, fourth and sixth week of those school holidays.   immediately notify the other in the event that the child suffers a serious illness or injury whilst in their respective care, (b) advise the other of any significant medical or health appointment to be attended by the child and authorise the other parent to attend same, and (c) keep the other informed of the names and contact details of the medical practitioners upon whom the child attends from time to time, and irrevocably authorises such persons to discuss the child with the other parent either in writing, via telephone or personal attendance.   advise the other of any significant medical or health appointment to be attended by the child and authorise the other parent to attend same, and (c) keep the other informed of the names and contact details of the medical practitioners upon whom the child attends from time to time, and irrevocably authorises such persons to discuss the child with the other parent either in writing, via telephone or personal attendance.   keep the other informed of the names and contact details of the medical practitioners upon whom the child attends from time to time, and irrevocably authorises such persons to discuss the child with the other parent either in writing, via telephone or personal attendance.   service station at d street in respect of the mother dropping the child off to the father, and (b) service station suburb e at f street in respect of the father dropping the child off to the mother.   service station suburb e at f street in respect of the father dropping the child off to the mother.   keep the other informed of any school or educational institution attended by the child, (b) be at liberty to discuss the child's progress at school with her, (c) authorise the other parent to receive copies of all school reports, newsletters, photographs and other important information (d) be at liberty to attend any school function to which parents are normally invited such as concerts, sports carnivals, parent teacher interviews, information sessions and any other similar event (subject to any school policy in relation thereto).   be at liberty to discuss the child's progress at school with her, (c) authorise the other parent to receive copies of all school reports, newsletters, photographs and other important information (d) be at liberty to attend any school function to which parents are normally invited such as concerts, sports carnivals, parent teacher interviews, information sessions and any other similar event (subject to any school policy in relation thereto).   authorise the other parent to receive copies of all school reports, newsletters, photographs and other important information (d) be at liberty to attend any school function to which parents are normally invited such as concerts, sports carnivals, parent teacher interviews, information sessions and any other similar event (subject to any school policy in relation thereto).   be at liberty to attend any school function to which parents are normally invited such as concerts, sports carnivals, parent teacher interviews, information sessions and any other similar event (subject to any school policy in relation thereto).   with the father from 4.00pm christmas eve until 9.00am boxing day in odd numbered years, and (b) with the mother from 4.00pm christmas eve until 9.00am boxing day in even numbered years.   with the mother from 4.00pm christmas eve until 9.00am boxing day in even numbered years.
notation:
reasons for judgment
judge vasta
introduction
sexual offending in the family of the mother
previous domestic violence
interaction with x by the father after separation
...not comfortable in sending [x] to visit with you at your brother’s house because of your past history of abusive behaviour”. the mother also said that “additionally, it has been several months since you have seen [x]. she is young and a few months is a long time to her. you are a virtual stranger to her and she is at an age where separation anxiety is an issue. i don’t feel that sending her to spend time with you is the best choice for her emotional well-being at this point in time as she simply doesn’t know you.
these proceedings
child inclusive conference memorandum
the mother impressed as holding a high level of mistrust towards the father and believes that he lacks in parenting skills and may “lash out” in an emotionally abusive way towards [x]. whilst the mother reported she is no longer fearful of the father, she does not want to engage in verbal communication with him with her preference being for email or text messages.
at the end of the observation session, the mother, infant maternal half-brother ([l]) and the stepfather were brought into the observation room by the writer and [x] appeared to become still and put her head down. this may indicate that [x] experienced a level of discomfort with regards to all parties being in the same room. the writer encourages [x] to say goodbye to the father and let her know that she would now spend some time playing with the mother, stepfather and [l]. [x] approached the father and he picked her up to give a hug and told her he loved her and look forward to seeing her soon.
first family report of ms p
the mediation
affidavit of the mother 16 november 2021
the mother’s version of what occurred in late 2021
23. [late] 2012, [x] returned home again, miserable and quiet. i asked her if she is okay, [x] said “he said dont tell you”. my husband and i told her that shes safe, she can tell us anything and she wont get into trouble. [x] then said “he smacked me again”. and expressed to us that she “never wants to go back to him not forever”. 24. we drove directly to the [suburb r] police station [on a day in late] 2021 after she had told us this again and i received advice from an officer who advised me to stop all visitations at this time and to report these things to the department of child safety. 25. we then went to a friends home for dinner after the police station and upon returning home [x] had a shower. [x] was in the shower and i began to hear her cry, i walked in and asked her what is wrong. [x] told me that her “bum bum” was hurting. i asked what had happened (assuming she had somehow hurt it in the shower). [x] than stated “[mr potter] did it”. i asked her if i could see her bottom to see if i could notice anything that may be causing her some pain in the shower. i noticed a scratch in the crack of her bottom and ask her how it happened. she said again “he did it”. [x] finished her shower and myself and my husband sat down with her in our lounge room and asked her where this happened, if he had a wet wipe, if she had pooped and was he just wiping her and accidentally scratcher her. [x] clearly stated that there was no wet wipe, she did not poo that day, that it happened in the lounge room once [uncle mr n] had left and that his finger was in her bottom. we asked why he was doing that and [x] said he said “because he wanted too”.
the stepfather’s version of what occurred in late 2021
17.on [a day in late] 2021, i distinctly recall [x's] demeanour was again unusual. she was very quiet and seem disheartened. my wife asked [x] if she is okay and [x] expressed to us that [mr potter] said "he said don't tell you". she mentioned that she ''never wants to go back also stated that he had smacked her yet again. 18. my wife and i drove directly to the [suburb r] police station [on a day in late] 2021 where my wife went inside for some advice regarding the situation and i stayed in the car. 19. after this, myself, my wife, [x] and our son visited a friends home for dinner. 20. when we returned home my wife assisted [x] into the shower and i was sitting on our couch which is within ears reach of the shower. my wife had also come out into the lounge room and we then heard [x] began to scream and cry. [ms rubra] bolted into the shower and i heard [x] say ''my bum bum is hurting" while crying. i then heard her say "[mr potter] did it" repeating that twice. i then got up to see what was going on and saw a nail scratch on the crack of her bottom. my wife and i asked [x] a series of questions to ensure that we were understanding [x's] experience correctly. she very clearly stated that this didn't happen while her bottom was being wiped and that it happened once [uncle mr n] bas left the home and it was in the lounge room. [x] stated clearly that his finger was in her bottom. 21. we asked [x] why he did this to her and [x] stated that [mr potter] said "because he wanted too".
aftermath
the trial
exhibit 1 and exhibit 2
investigating officer attempted numerous phone calls and text messages to the mother of the child to speak with her. all attempts to make contact with the mother have been unsuccessful, further attempts have also been made to speak with the mother’s partner without success. advice would be provided that as the child is only three years old and it is unlikely that the child will not particularise offences during a 93a statement to a court standard due to her age. investigating officer has made several attempts to contact all parties without success.
what can be gleaned from this evidence?
how the allegation was made
...going out for the night and she found [x] in the shower crying. the mother said that [x] told her that the father had put his finger up her bottom. the mother said she walked out into the lounge where the stepfather was and asked [x] a number of different questions. the mother said that she understood that this had allegedly occurred in [mr n’s] home whilst the father and [x] were by themselves. the mother said that [x] disclosed that the father had put his finger inside [x’s] bottom and [x] had asked him to stop but the father said no.
the change of allegation
the demeanour of the child when making the allegation
what x said to ms p
5.1 on 15 august 2022, i conducted an age-appropriate interview of [x] at my office in [town v]. [x] was able to tell me that her family consisted of her mummy and her daddy and her father's name is [mr k]. she said that she also has two brothers named [l] and [m]. when asked about [mr potter], [x] stated that she also sees "[mr potter]" but she doesn't know why. she stated, "[mr potter] is another daddy" and she likes seeing him. [x] then stated, "he touched my private parts. he likes touching ladies' private parts", and when asked how she knew this, [x] stated "mummy told me". [x] said that [ms rubra] had said some other things but "i've forgotten what else mummy said". 5.2 [x] stated that [mr potter] is not a good person because he touched her private parts at his house. i then asked [x] if she could tell me a little bit more about this and she stated she was in [mr potter's] bedroom and [mr potter] put his finger in her bottom but she couldn't remember what else. [x] then stated, "i can remember that mummy told me that i can only see him at places where i'm safe". 5.3 [x] appeared to be speaking in a very matter of fact manner and did not display any anxiety as she said this to me. [x] stated, "i have two daddies, daddy [mr k] and daddy [mr potter] but daddy [mr k] and daddy [mr potter] are not good friends because daddy [mr k] doesn't like daddy [mr potter]." when i asked [x] what she thought about [mr potter], she stated that she likes him and likes spending time with him.
credibility of the stepfather
discussion
demeanour of x
behaviour of the mother (and stepfather)
problems
the solution
other aspects of the family report
application of the act
application of law to the circumstances of the case
primary considerations – section 60b  the benefit to the children of having a meaningful relationship with both parents (b) the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   the need to protect the children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence.   it is important to x that she has a meaningful relationship with both her mother and father, and (b) there is a very great need to protect x from being exposed to the risk of family violence, harm or abuse, particularly emotional abuse.   there is a very great need to protect x from being exposed to the risk of family violence, harm or abuse, particularly emotional abuse.   both parents to their credit acknowledge that it is important for the children to have a meaningful relationship with the other parent. unfortunately, it is only the father who is committed to x having a meaningful relationship with the mother whereas the mother is not committed to x having a meaningful relationship with the father. (b) as i have already mentioned, to fabricate allegations against a parent and recruit the child into playing a part in that fabrication, is one of the worst ways in which a parent can abuse a child.   as i have already mentioned, to fabricate allegations against a parent and recruit the child into playing a part in that fabrication, is one of the worst ways in which a parent can abuse a child.
additional considerations – section 60cc(3)  in my view, x is too young to be able to form any firm and considered view about this subject. (b) there is no doubt that the mother has a very close and loving relationship with x. the observations made by ms p on both occasions as well as the notations from u contact centre illustrate that the father also has a very close and loving relationship with x. x does have close relationships to her stepfather and her half-brothers as well as with her maternal and paternal extended families. (c) i have spoken of this circumstance in detailing the history of the matter and need not discuss this aspect further. (ca) i am satisfied that both parents have, and will continue to, carry out their obligations to maintain x. (d) this aspect has had particular significance in this case and i will address the matter further, later in these reasons. (e) because of the areas that the parents have now chosen to live, this means that there will be great practical difficulties with x spending time with the parent with whom she is not living for the majority of her time, other than weekend time. (f) the findings that i have made in regard to the substantial issues in this matter relate to this particular circumstance. (g) i have taken into account these considerations. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) as i have found, the responsibility to parenthood of the mother has been appalling. the responsibility to parenthood goes beyond feeding, clothing and housing a child. it extends to teaching them right from wrong and giving them an example to look upon as to how to act as a decent member of society. (j) i have looked at the claims that the mother has made in this regard. whilst not dismissing those concerns, i am in agreement with the observations made by ms p as to how these matters affect the orders i need to make. (k) this circumstance does not apply (l) in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   there is no doubt that the mother has a very close and loving relationship with x. the observations made by ms p on both occasions as well as the notations from u contact centre illustrate that the father also has a very close and loving relationship with x. x does have close relationships to her stepfather and her half-brothers as well as with her maternal and paternal extended families. (c) i have spoken of this circumstance in detailing the history of the matter and need not discuss this aspect further. (ca) i am satisfied that both parents have, and will continue to, carry out their obligations to maintain x. (d) this aspect has had particular significance in this case and i will address the matter further, later in these reasons. (e) because of the areas that the parents have now chosen to live, this means that there will be great practical difficulties with x spending time with the parent with whom she is not living for the majority of her time, other than weekend time. (f) the findings that i have made in regard to the substantial issues in this matter relate to this particular circumstance. (g) i have taken into account these considerations. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) as i have found, the responsibility to parenthood of the mother has been appalling. the responsibility to parenthood goes beyond feeding, clothing and housing a child. it extends to teaching them right from wrong and giving them an example to look upon as to how to act as a decent member of society. (j) i have looked at the claims that the mother has made in this regard. whilst not dismissing those concerns, i am in agreement with the observations made by ms p as to how these matters affect the orders i need to make. (k) this circumstance does not apply (l) in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have spoken of this circumstance in detailing the history of the matter and need not discuss this aspect further. (ca) i am satisfied that both parents have, and will continue to, carry out their obligations to maintain x. (d) this aspect has had particular significance in this case and i will address the matter further, later in these reasons. (e) because of the areas that the parents have now chosen to live, this means that there will be great practical difficulties with x spending time with the parent with whom she is not living for the majority of her time, other than weekend time. (f) the findings that i have made in regard to the substantial issues in this matter relate to this particular circumstance. (g) i have taken into account these considerations. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) as i have found, the responsibility to parenthood of the mother has been appalling. the responsibility to parenthood goes beyond feeding, clothing and housing a child. it extends to teaching them right from wrong and giving them an example to look upon as to how to act as a decent member of society. (j) i have looked at the claims that the mother has made in this regard. whilst not dismissing those concerns, i am in agreement with the observations made by ms p as to how these matters affect the orders i need to make. (k) this circumstance does not apply (l) in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.  ) i am satisfied that both parents have, and will continue to, carry out their obligations to maintain x. (d) this aspect has had particular significance in this case and i will address the matter further, later in these reasons. (e) because of the areas that the parents have now chosen to live, this means that there will be great practical difficulties with x spending time with the parent with whom she is not living for the majority of her time, other than weekend time. (f) the findings that i have made in regard to the substantial issues in this matter relate to this particular circumstance. (g) i have taken into account these considerations. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) as i have found, the responsibility to parenthood of the mother has been appalling. the responsibility to parenthood goes beyond feeding, clothing and housing a child. it extends to teaching them right from wrong and giving them an example to look upon as to how to act as a decent member of society. (j) i have looked at the claims that the mother has made in this regard. whilst not dismissing those concerns, i am in agreement with the observations made by ms p as to how these matters affect the orders i need to make. (k) this circumstance does not apply (l) in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   this aspect has had particular significance in this case and i will address the matter further, later in these reasons. (e) because of the areas that the parents have now chosen to live, this means that there will be great practical difficulties with x spending time with the parent with whom she is not living for the majority of her time, other than weekend time. (f) the findings that i have made in regard to the substantial issues in this matter relate to this particular circumstance. (g) i have taken into account these considerations. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) as i have found, the responsibility to parenthood of the mother has been appalling. the responsibility to parenthood goes beyond feeding, clothing and housing a child. it extends to teaching them right from wrong and giving them an example to look upon as to how to act as a decent member of society. (j) i have looked at the claims that the mother has made in this regard. whilst not dismissing those concerns, i am in agreement with the observations made by ms p as to how these matters affect the orders i need to make. (k) this circumstance does not apply (l) in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   because of the areas that the parents have now chosen to live, this means that there will be great practical difficulties with x spending time with the parent with whom she is not living for the majority of her time, other than weekend time. (f) the findings that i have made in regard to the substantial issues in this matter relate to this particular circumstance. (g) i have taken into account these considerations. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) as i have found, the responsibility to parenthood of the mother has been appalling. the responsibility to parenthood goes beyond feeding, clothing and housing a child. it extends to teaching them right from wrong and giving them an example to look upon as to how to act as a decent member of society. (j) i have looked at the claims that the mother has made in this regard. whilst not dismissing those concerns, i am in agreement with the observations made by ms p as to how these matters affect the orders i need to make. (k) this circumstance does not apply (l) in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   the findings that i have made in regard to the substantial issues in this matter relate to this particular circumstance. (g) i have taken into account these considerations. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) as i have found, the responsibility to parenthood of the mother has been appalling. the responsibility to parenthood goes beyond feeding, clothing and housing a child. it extends to teaching them right from wrong and giving them an example to look upon as to how to act as a decent member of society. (j) i have looked at the claims that the mother has made in this regard. whilst not dismissing those concerns, i am in agreement with the observations made by ms p as to how these matters affect the orders i need to make. (k) this circumstance does not apply (l) in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have taken into account these considerations. (h) this circumstance does not apply (i) as i have found, the responsibility to parenthood of the mother has been appalling. the responsibility to parenthood goes beyond feeding, clothing and housing a child. it extends to teaching them right from wrong and giving them an example to look upon as to how to act as a decent member of society. (j) i have looked at the claims that the mother has made in this regard. whilst not dismissing those concerns, i am in agreement with the observations made by ms p as to how these matters affect the orders i need to make. (k) this circumstance does not apply (l) in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   this circumstance does not apply (i) as i have found, the responsibility to parenthood of the mother has been appalling. the responsibility to parenthood goes beyond feeding, clothing and housing a child. it extends to teaching them right from wrong and giving them an example to look upon as to how to act as a decent member of society. (j) i have looked at the claims that the mother has made in this regard. whilst not dismissing those concerns, i am in agreement with the observations made by ms p as to how these matters affect the orders i need to make. (k) this circumstance does not apply (l) in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   as i have found, the responsibility to parenthood of the mother has been appalling. the responsibility to parenthood goes beyond feeding, clothing and housing a child. it extends to teaching them right from wrong and giving them an example to look upon as to how to act as a decent member of society. (j) i have looked at the claims that the mother has made in this regard. whilst not dismissing those concerns, i am in agreement with the observations made by ms p as to how these matters affect the orders i need to make. (k) this circumstance does not apply (l) in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have looked at the claims that the mother has made in this regard. whilst not dismissing those concerns, i am in agreement with the observations made by ms p as to how these matters affect the orders i need to make. (k) this circumstance does not apply (l) in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   this circumstance does not apply (l) in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   in making these orders, i have no doubt that the mother will exercise her right of appeal. but, if the factual conclusions i have made are correct, there is no other responsible order that a court could make other than the ones which i will make. (m) i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.   i have detailed, in these reasons, all matters that i consider relevant.
parental responsibility
conclusions as to parenting
associate: dated: 26 may 2023
dated: 26 may 2023