last updated: 17 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
patchett & tapley [2023] fedcfamc2f 737
orders
the court orders until further order that:
the w born in 2018, x born in 2013, y born in 2010 and z born in 2008 live with the father.  the applicant to attend at 9.00am, and (b) the respondent to attend at 10.30am.   the respondent to attend at 10.30am.
microsoft teams links will be provided to the parties by the court child expert prior to the event.
part 2 of the event will occur in person at the darwin registry at darwin supreme court building, on the morning 12 july 2023. specific details regarding the attendance of the parties and children on this date will be provided to the parties in part 1 of the event.  any agreement reached between the parties, (b) identification of key issues requiring resolution, (c) any views expressed by the children and any matters (such as the children’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the children, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   identification of key issues requiring resolution, (c) any views expressed by the children and any matters (such as the children’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the children, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   any views expressed by the children and any matters (such as the children’s maturity or level of understanding) that would affect the weight that the court should place on those views, (d) the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the children, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   the impact of the issues/dispute before the court on the children, (e) any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   any other matters that the court child expert considers important to the welfare or best interests of the children.   material produced by a child protection authority pursuant to subpoena or a section 69zw order made in these proceedings, (b) material produced by a police service pursuant to subpoena or section 69zw of the family law act 1975 (cth) made in these proceedings, (c) any other relevant material presently before the court in admissible form.   material produced by a police service pursuant to subpoena or section 69zw of the family law act 1975 (cth) made in these proceedings, (c) any other relevant material presently before the court in admissible form.   any other relevant material presently before the court in admissible form.
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge young
associate: dated: 30 may 2023
dated: 30 may 2023