last updated: 17 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
sachs & massen (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 738
orders
upon noting that
the father filed a notice of discontinuance on the 11 may 2023.
the court orders that:  the father is to provide the mother with a phone number she may contact the children on within seven (7) days of service of this order. (b) the father shall facilitate and not interfere with the telephone calls with the mother. (c) the mother may communicate with the children by post or email every two (2) months and the father shall ensure that the children have access to their email accounts to facilitate that communication.   the father shall facilitate and not interfere with the telephone calls with the mother. (c) the mother may communicate with the children by post or email every two (2) months and the father shall ensure that the children have access to their email accounts to facilitate that communication.   the mother may communicate with the children by post or email every two (2) months and the father shall ensure that the children have access to their email accounts to facilitate that communication.   in the event that the mother resides in the northern territory: in the town b or darwin regions, following the completion of three (3) visits at the contact centre, the children shall spend time with the mother in darwin for one (1) weekend per calendar month, provided the mother provides the father at least 14 days’ notice. (b) changeover for the above time between the mother and the children shall be effected by the mother collecting the children from their school at the commencement of time and returning the children to the paternal grandmother’s house at the conclusion of that time. (c) the father may not approach nor attempt to communicate with the mother during any changeover event at any time.   changeover for the above time between the mother and the children shall be effected by the mother collecting the children from their school at the commencement of time and returning the children to the paternal grandmother’s house at the conclusion of that time. (c) the father may not approach nor attempt to communicate with the mother during any changeover event at any time.   the father may not approach nor attempt to communicate with the mother during any changeover event at any time.
specific issues  respect the privacy of the other parent and not question the children about the personal life of the other parent, and (b) speak of the other parent respectfully, and (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent in the presence or hearing of the children, and (d) use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children.   speak of the other parent respectfully, and (c) not denigrate or insult the other parent in the presence or hearing of the children, and (d) use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children.   not denigrate or insult the other parent in the presence or hearing of the children, and (d) use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children.   use their best endeavours to ensure that others do not denigrate or insult the other parent in the hearing or presence of the children.
ex tempore reasons for judgment
judge young
associate: dated: 31 may 2023
dated: 31 may 2023