last updated: 31 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
yuan & shun (no 2) [2023] fedcfamc2f 668
orders
the court orders that:  transferring, disposing or otherwise dealing with the husband’s interest in the real property situate and known as d street, suburb e in the state of victoria being the whole of the land more particularly described in certificate of title volume ... folio ... (“suburb e property”), and/or (b) encumbering or further encumbering the suburb e property, and/or (c) drawing down upon the loan account ending #...02 secured by mortgage encumbering the suburb e property.   encumbering or further encumbering the suburb e property, and/or (c) drawing down upon the loan account ending #...02 secured by mortgage encumbering the suburb e property.   drawing down upon the loan account ending #...02 secured by mortgage encumbering the suburb e property.   irreovacably instructing a selling agent of the wife’s choice to conduct the conveyancer on the instructions of the wife, (b) signing and producing to the wife a statement produced in accordance with section 32 of the transfer of land act 1958 (vic), (c) signing and producing to the wife a contract of sale, and (d) signing and producing to the wife any other document or doing any other thing necessary to facilitate the sale of the suburb e property.   signing and producing to the wife a statement produced in accordance with section 32 of the transfer of land act 1958 (vic), (c) signing and producing to the wife a contract of sale, and (d) signing and producing to the wife any other document or doing any other thing necessary to facilitate the sale of the suburb e property.   signing and producing to the wife a contract of sale, and (d) signing and producing to the wife any other document or doing any other thing necessary to facilitate the sale of the suburb e property.   signing and producing to the wife any other document or doing any other thing necessary to facilitate the sale of the suburb e property.   firstly, payment of all costs and commissions of the sale, (b) secondly, to discharge any encumbrance on title, and (c) thirdly, the remaining proceeds of sale to the wife.   secondly, to discharge any encumbrance on title, and (c) thirdly, the remaining proceeds of sale to the wife.   thirdly, the remaining proceeds of sale to the wife.   an affidavit by the compliant party and/or their solicitor setting out the non-compliant party’s failure to comply with these orders will be sufficient evidence of non-compliance, and (b) the compliant party nominate a solicitor who is authorised to sign documents of pexa transfers and such solicitor shall sign on behalf of the non-compliant party upon the written request from the compliant party to do so upon provision of a sealed copy of these orders.   the compliant party nominate a solicitor who is authorised to sign documents of pexa transfers and such solicitor shall sign on behalf of the non-compliant party upon the written request from the compliant party to do so upon provision of a sealed copy of these orders.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all other property (including choses-in-action and motor vehicles) in the possession of such party as at the date of these orders, (b) each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all monies standing to the credit of either of them in any bank account in their sole name, (c) each party forgoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits or other employment related benefits belonging to or earned by the other or any future inheritances received, (d) all insurance and pension policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, and (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.   each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all monies standing to the credit of either of them in any bank account in their sole name, (c) each party forgoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits or other employment related benefits belonging to or earned by the other or any future inheritances received, (d) all insurance and pension policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, and (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.   each party forgoes any claims they may have to any superannuation benefits or other employment related benefits belonging to or earned by the other or any future inheritances received, (d) all insurance and pension policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, and (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.   all insurance and pension policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein, and (e) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.   each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability encumbering any item of property to which that party is entitled pursuant to these orders.
and the court notes that:
reasons for judgmentjudge harland
background
property general principles
it will be recalled that s 79(2) provides that "[t]he court shall not make an order under this section unless it is satisfied that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order. section 79(4) prescribes matters that must be taken into account in considering what order (if any) should be made under the section. the requirements of the two sub-sections are not to be conflated. in every case in which a property settlement order under s 79 is sought, it is necessary to satisfy the court that, in all the circumstances, it is just and equitable to make the order.” the expression “just and equitable” is a qualitative description of a conclusion reached after examination of a range of potentially competing considerations. it does not admit of exhaustive definition. it is not possible to chart its metes and bounds.” [footnotes omitted]
firstly, in order to ascertain whether it is just and equitable to make a property settlement order, it is necessary to identify the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in the property. the high court emphasised the word ‘existing’. secondly, although s.79 gives the court a broad power to make property settlement orders it may not be exercised in an unprincipled fashion. there must be no assumption that the parties’ interests are or should be different to their existing interests. thirdly, when considering whether making a property settlement order is just and equitable the court must not assume that one or the other party has the right to a property adjustment order. the court must give separate consideration to s.79(2) in addition to the matters referred to in s.79(4).
family violence
financial disclosure and disclosure obligations
attempts to acertain the parties’ existing legal and equitable interests
contributions
initial contributions
contributions during the relationship
post-separation contributions
section 75(2) factors
conclusion
associate: dated: 1 june 2023
dated: 1 june 2023
[1] see yuan & shun [2023] fedcfamc2f 603.