last updated: 17 july 2023
federal circuit and family court of australia ision 2)
capan & capan [2023] fedcfamc2f 683
orders
the court orders that:  within 21 days the husband is to vacate the property located at b street, suburb c in the state of new south wales being the whole of the property in certificate of title folio identifier ... (“the b street, suburb c property”), (b) the wife (“the trustee”) be appointed as trustee for the sale of the b street, suburb c property, (c) the trustee be authorised to do all acts and sign all documents necessary to effect the sale, including but not limited to: (i) selecting an agent to market the property and entering in an agency agreement with said agent, (ii) setting the listing price and method of sale, (iii) selecting a solicitor or conveyancer to prepare the contract of sale and undertake the conveyancing, (iv) accepting an offer of purchase, (v) signing any document on behalf of the parties required to undertake the above steps.   the wife (“the trustee”) be appointed as trustee for the sale of the b street, suburb c property, (c) the trustee be authorised to do all acts and sign all documents necessary to effect the sale, including but not limited to: (i) selecting an agent to market the property and entering in an agency agreement with said agent, (ii) setting the listing price and method of sale, (iii) selecting a solicitor or conveyancer to prepare the contract of sale and undertake the conveyancing, (iv) accepting an offer of purchase, (v) signing any document on behalf of the parties required to undertake the above steps.   the trustee be authorised to do all acts and sign all documents necessary to effect the sale, including but not limited to: (i) selecting an agent to market the property and entering in an agency agreement with said agent, (ii) setting the listing price and method of sale, (iii) selecting a solicitor or conveyancer to prepare the contract of sale and undertake the conveyancing, (iv) accepting an offer of purchase, (v) signing any document on behalf of the parties required to undertake the above steps.   selecting an agent to market the property and entering in an agency agreement with said agent, (ii) setting the listing price and method of sale, (iii) selecting a solicitor or conveyancer to prepare the contract of sale and undertake the conveyancing, (iv) accepting an offer of purchase, (v) signing any document on behalf of the parties required to undertake the above steps.  ) setting the listing price and method of sale, (iii) selecting a solicitor or conveyancer to prepare the contract of sale and undertake the conveyancing, (iv) accepting an offer of purchase, (v) signing any document on behalf of the parties required to undertake the above steps.  i) selecting a solicitor or conveyancer to prepare the contract of sale and undertake the conveyancing, (iv) accepting an offer of purchase, (v) signing any document on behalf of the parties required to undertake the above steps.  ) accepting an offer of purchase, (v) signing any document on behalf of the parties required to undertake the above steps.   signing any document on behalf of the parties required to undertake the above steps.
ex-tempore reasons for judgment
judge murdoch
service  was aware of the application for enforcement filed by the wife and was not unfairly prejudiced in circumstances where he had counsel appear at the listing of the matter before the deputy registrar, and (b) was aware of the application for review listed before the court today in circumstances where he has had counsel appear and filed a case outline in support of his position.   was aware of the application for review listed before the court today in circumstances where he has had counsel appear and filed a case outline in support of his position.
leave to amend the application – enforcement
application for review
that within 7 days of the date of these orders the husband pay to the wife the sum of $1,247.74 that she has paid to the husband pursuant to order 3 of orders dated 5 april 2023. that the wife be granted leave to amend her enforcement application filed 7 march 2023. that pursuant to rule 11.07(e) order 1 of orders dated 5 september 2022 be enforced by way of the following order: within 21 days the husband is to vacate the property located at [b street, suburb c] in the state of nsw and identified in folio identifier ... ("the [b street, suburb c] property") that the wife is appointed the trustee for the parties for the sale of the [b street, suburb c] property and is authorised, as trustee, to do all things and sign all documents that are necessary to effect the sale. that the husband is to pay the wife's costs of and incidental to: the application for enforcement filed 7 march 2023 and this application for review.
the law   an obligation to pay money, (b) an obligation to sign a document under section 106a of the act, (c) an order entitling a person to the possession of real property, and (d) an order entitling a person to the transfer or delivery of personal property.   an obligation to sign a document under section 106a of the act, (c) an order entitling a person to the possession of real property, and (d) an order entitling a person to the transfer or delivery of personal property.   an order entitling a person to the possession of real property, and (d) an order entitling a person to the transfer or delivery of personal property.   an order entitling a person to the transfer or delivery of personal property.
the wife’s case
...it also appears that your client has blatantly disregarded our client’s requests by continuing to work from the matrimonial home daily. as previously communicated, our client does not approve of your client continuing to work from the matrimonial home (his “home”). this is completely unacceptable... it seems that your client does not wish to resolve the children orders but rather wishes to continue to attempt to provoke our client so as to “get a reaction” from him. is this because her intentions are to make a claim of domestic violence with a view to taking the children from our client entirely?.... your client should also immediately leave the matrimonial home and leave all sets of keys to the matrimonial home on the kitchen bench. your client should not return with a view to gain access whether it be for work purposes or otherwise without written consent from our client. put simply, your client cannot have her cake and eat it too. she vacated the property and now wishes to return therefore “work” or to try to provoke a reaction from our client. if she cannot live with our client, then she surely cannot be in the same home for work or any other purposes. there is no logical reason why your client must continue to work from the matrimonial home. if your client cannot work from her new residence then she should make alternative suitable arrangements. unfortunately, only the children will suffer by your client’s outrageous and irrational behaviour.
costs
associate: dated: 1 june 2023
dated: 1 june 2023